Title: Testing the Spatiotemporal Predictions of Global Neuronal Workspace Theory and Integrated Information Theory

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
Testing the Spatiotemporal Predictions of Global Neuronal Workspace Theory and 

Integrated Information Theory 

Kavindu H. Bandara 1, Elise G. Rowe 1, Marta I. Garrido 1,2 

1Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 

Victoria, Australia 

2Graeme Clark Institute for Biomedical Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Australia 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Ab stract 

The neural mechanisms underlying conscious perception remain contested, with 

global neuronal workspace theory (GNWT) and integrated information theory (IIT) offering 

divergent predictions about the spatiotemporal dynamics of conscious processing. The 

Cogitate Consortium (2025) recently conducted a large -scale adversarial collaboration to 

arbitrate between GNWT and IIT; however, some of their analyses yielded mixed findings. 

As the original study relied on functional connectivity, it could not assess the dir ected neural 

influences required to directly test the mechanistic claims of these theories. Here, we re -

examined the Cogitate Consortium’s MEG dataset (N = 100) using dynamic causal modelling 

(DCM) to test the effective connectivity profiles predicted by each theory during task -

irrelevant face perception. We adopted a split discovery -validation procedure and an 

expanding time -window approach to track the temporal evolution of prototypical networks 

for each theory. Specifically, we evaluated GNWT’s predictio n of phasic prefrontal "ignition" 

by testing the necessity of PFC feedback to category -selective areas at stimulus onset and 

offset , and then tested IIT’s prediction of sustained posterior integration by testing extrinsic 

feedback and intrinsic connectivity within content -specific regions. We found support for 

both GNWT predictions of prefrontal ignition at stimulus onset and offset ; noting that the 

latter was not previously observed in the original Cogitate analyses. For IIT, whilst feedback 

connectivity between the fusiform gyrus and primary visual cortex was not sustained 

throughout the stimulus duration, intrinsic fusiform gyrus connectivity was broadly consistent 

with IIT's prediction of sustained processing within a content -specific substrate. However, a 

post -hoc validation analysis comparing face - and object -specific DCM networks did not yield 

strong evidence for face selectivity at any time window (pp< 0. 95) , warranting a conservative 

interpretation of the IIT findings in particular. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Testing the Spatiotemporal Predictions of Global Neuronal Workspace Theory and 

Integrated Information Theory 

Despite a surge of interest and accumulating empirical data in the science of 

consciousness , researchers have failed to conclusively arbitrate between the many theories of 

consciousness that now exist (Seth & Bayne, 2022) . This is due, in part, to the fact that 

different theoretical models of consciousness have developed in isolation and rarely receive 

direct comparison (Yaron et al. 2022). To address this, the Cogitate Consortium et al. (202 5)

recently conducted a large -scale adversarial collaboration directly comparing two of the most 

prominent contemporary theories of consciousness: global neuronal workspace theory 

(GNWT; Dehaene & Naccache, 2001 ; Mashour et al., 2020 ) and integrated information 

theory (IIT; Tononi et al., 2016 ; Albantakis et al., 2023 ). However, since the original study 

only considered the data in terms of functional connectivity , it could not test the directed 

influence of different regions on each other. In this chapter , we address this gap by re -

examin ing this dataset using dynamic causal modelling (DCM) to formally test putative 

transient prefrontal connectivity as predicted by GNWT versus sustained posterior integration 

predicted by IIT , during conscious perception. 

To summarise the key theoretical predictions of GNWT, the theory postulates th at 

consciousness is characterised by a late -stage non -linear response (termed an ignition) 

occurring within 300 -500 ms post -stimulus onset and offset occurring in a large scale 

frontoparietal network (see Figure 1) . This is because an onset and offset are both considered 

an update in the percept and hence the offset too should elicit an ignition as it is essentially 

the “onset” of a blank screen . Further , the theory highlights the importance of feedback 

connections during the ignition phase, important for the amplification and broadcasting of 

conscious information (Dehaene et al., 2003; Dehaene & Changeux, 2005; Mashour et al., 

2020) .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In contrast to GNWT, IIT predicts that the physical substrate of a conscious 

experience (termed the "main complex") exists as a maxima of irreducible integrated 

information (Tononi et al., 2016) . The most promising candidate network to sustain this 

complex is argued to likely reside in posterior , sensory regions of the brain – an area that is 

term ed the “posterior hot -zone ” (Koch et al., 2016) . Temporally speaking , IIT predicts that 

the neural substrates of consciousness must be actively sustained for the entire duration of the 

conscious percept (Cogitate Consortium, 2025; Tononi et al., 2016) . This is b ecause the 

theory postulates that the cause -effect structure is identical to the experience itself, so the 

complex specifying that structure must be continuously maintained 

Figure 1. Divergent spatiotemporal predictions of GNWT and IIT and study design . (A) GNWT 

predicts c onsciousness is associated with a "global ignition" event in a frontoparietal network (the 

global workspace ). Temporally, this manifests as a late, phasic burst of activity at both stimulus onset 

and offset (~300ms) followed by an activity -silent maintenance period. (B) IIT predicts c onsciousness 

is associated with a maxim a of integrated information , Φ, within the "posterior hot zone" (temporo -

parietal -occipital cortex) such that that the neural substrate is sustained for the duration of stimulus 

presentation . (C) The dynamic causal modelling (DCM) network architecture used to formally test 

these predictions. The model comprises the bilateral primary visual cortex (V1), fusiform gyrus (FG ;

the relevant category -selective region ), and the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Green arrows indicate initial 

sensory input. Black arrows represent extrinsic connections allo wed to freely modulate. To evaluate 

the necessity of specific theoretical mechanisms, targeted connections were "switched off" in reduced 

models in relevant time -windows. B lue arrows denote the PFC to FG feedback connections removed 

to test GNWT's transient broadcasting, while orange arrows denote the FG to V1 feedback removed to 

test IIT's sustained posterior connectivity . FG intrinsic self -connections were also tested via Bayesian 

model reduction and averaging. 

Current Study & Hypotheses 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

While the Cogitate Consortium (2025) study was a significant achievement, the 

original analyses yielded mixed results for both theories. Notably, while some evidence for 

GNWT onset ignition was observed, the theory’s pre dicted offset ignition was absent. 

Further, analyses of inter -regional connectivity challenged both theories. It is possible that the 

decision to restrict analyses to the high gamma in the original study, may have overlooked 

potentially critical frequencies within lower frequency band s. To address these possibilities ,

we re -examine d this dataset using DCM for evoked responses to test the connectivity profiles 

predicted by GNWT and IIT across the whole frequency spectrum .

It is worth noting that the overall design of the experiment was driven by 

falsificationism (Melloni, 2022) ; such that all stimuli were clearly visible, fully attended, and 

there was no additional task to complete and thus, performance was at ceiling levels. 

Therefore, if GNWT and IIT predict certain brain regions will be active in a certain way 

across time while participants are undeniably conscious of the stimuli, then the predictions of 

the respective theory should be observed in the data. If these predictions are not observed, 

then this would pose a challenge to the respective theory. 

To test these theories using DCM, we translated the Consortium’s preregistered 

predictions into specific, diagnostic DCM network predictions (summarized in Figure 2 ), 

consisting of two distinct tests each for both GNWT and IIT. While the Cogitate 

preregistration postulated general relationships between broad cortical zones (e.g., "sustained 

connectivity between PFC and category -selective areas"), DCM requires a translation of 

these broad claims into specifically defined network n odes. One of the predictions where this 

was particularly important was our second IIT prediction. Because IIT predicts that the main 

complex which instantiates consciousness can move and shrink depending on the exact 

experience, we assessed whether the postulated sustained connectivity would be instantiated 

entirely locally (i.e. within the fusiform gyrus; FG ). We reasoned that if the FG is embedded 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

within a broader complex -- whether realised locally entirely within the FG or within a 

broader network between the FG and other (unmodelled) regions – this region would 

necessarily exhibit sustained self -connectivity. Additionally, we did not test timepoi nts 

outside the stimulus onset window for either duration (i.e. 1000ms or 1500ms). Although IIT 

predicts that the physical substrate of consciousness corresponds directly to the ongoing 

experience, so that face -related processing must collapse once the fac e is removed, standard 

models of visual perception similarly predict a return to baseline activity during a fixation 

cross as the FFA is highly selective to faces (Kanwisher et al., 1997). Consequently, 

observing a lack of connectivity at stimulus offset w ould not uniquely support IIT, insofar as 

this observation would be similarly consistent with other models of visual processing, 

rendering the offset period predictions non -diagnostic for IIT. 

Figure 2. Sum mary of the key predi ctions of each theory to our DCM tests. These key predictions 

were adapted from the preregistered predictions (obtained from Extended Data Table 1) of the original 

study (Cogitate Consortium, 2025) where the original prediction number ing is referenced . We include 

only the predictions relevant to our specific analyses, omitting tests of object perception or decoding. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The middle column details how these previous predictions were translated into DCM predictions in 

the current analysis. Note also that for the GNWT predictions we opted to not test the maintenance 

interval (between onset and offset) because GNWT offers ambiguous predictions during this phase. 

That is, GNWT predicts either activity -silent maintenance or intermittent bouts of broadcast ing 

depending on whether the stimulus is actively attended (Melloni et al., 2023) . The right column 

describes the control analy sis using Bayesian model selection (BMS) which allows one to determine 

which model best explains the observed data. Here, contrasts of source reconstructed images were 

used to determine coordinates within regions of interest demonstrating greater activation for objects 

(i.e. objects > all other stimuli) and faces (i.e. faces > all other stimuli). By comparing models using 

object -specific versus face -specific coordinates, this analysis was conducted to determine the 

specificity of the tested network s to face stimuli . This specificity check is particularly critical for 

evaluating IIT, as this theory makes strong claims regarding the content -specific ity of the underlying 

neural substrates . Posterior probability is denoted by pp, with a threshold of pp > 0.95 indicating 

strong evidence for the model (Kass & Raftery, 1995). 

To test these predictions, we focused on a specific subset of the Cogitate Consortium’s 

experimental data. To isolate the neural correlates of conscious perception and reduce task -

related executive or motor confounds, we restricted our analysis entirely to task -irrelevant 

trials. Additionally, we specifically analysed face stimuli because they reliably engage a well -

characterised higher -sensory network, allowing us to anchor our models to the FG ; a well -

established higher -sensory, category -selective area (Kanwisher et al., 1997) , that is also 

argued to be a content -specific region for conscious face perception (Koch et al., 2016) . We

also constrained our analyses to the 1s and 1.5s stimulus durations to ensure a sufficiently 

long temporal window to evaluate IIT’s prediction of sustained connectivity. Additionally, 

because of the well -known feedforward sweep of information across the cortical hierarchy 

which accompanies visual perception , i t is only the feedback connections that are able to 

theoretically distinguish these theories of consciousness from standard models of visual 

perception , and thus we constrained our analysis to testing only the feedback connections .

Finally, we opted to only analyse the magnetoencephalography (MEG) dataset here (not the 

fMRI/EEG) . MEG offers both the millisecond -level temporal resolution needed to test 

precise predictions about the timing of neural responses and also offers spatial resolution 

advantages needed for cortic al source reconstruction. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

As the differing predictions diverge not only spatially, but also temporally, we used an 

expanding time -window approach for our DCM inversions (inspired by a similar approach by 

Garrido et al., 2007). We modelled data across expanding time windows following both 

stimulus onset and offset, to track model evidence over time and identify when specific 

directed connections emerged and whether they were sustained throughout the duration of the 

percept . Finally, to ensure the robustness and replicability of our findings, we adopted a split 

discovery and validation procedure (Poldrack et al., 2017) .

Methods 

Data for this experiment were collected by the Cogitate Consortium (2025) and kindly 

made publicly available. For the sake of context , a brief overview of the experiment design 

will be provided here but for detailed methods regarding data acquisition and participant 

demographics , please refer to the original paper (Cogitate Consortium, 2025) .

The entire analysis pipeline, including preprocessing, source reconstruction, DCM 

specification, and PEB, was developed and finalised exclusively on the discovery batch. 

Once the pipeline was fixed, it was applied without modification to the validation batch. 

Therefore, in addition to the predictions of either theory being tested here , th e splitting of 

analys es required that the predictions be p resent in both batches of analyses to be considered 

robust and replicable . Significant findings in one batch but not the other must be interpreted 

with caution given their lack of replicability .

Participants 

A total of 10 0 healthy volunteers were recruited for the MEG portion of the study. 

Data was split into two batches for analysis. This included a discovery set of N = 48 

participants and a validation set of N = 52 participants. There was 1 exclusion from batch 1 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and 2 because they fail ed to achieve the required hit rate of >80% or a false alarm rate higher 

than 20%. This left a total sample of 98 participants. 

Design and Procedure 

As illustrated in Fig ure 3, participants view ed a sequence of suprathreshold visual 

stimuli while performing a non -speeded target detection task. Stimuli consisted of four 

categories: faces, objects, letters, and false fonts ; each of which were comprised of a set of 20 

different identities (e.g. 20 different face identities) . These were presented for three different 

durations (0.5s, 1s, and 1.5s) to manipulate the length of the conscious percept and all 

stimulus presentations plus the subs equent blank screen were fixed at a length of 2s . This 

ensured a minimum post -stimulus window of 0.5s to capture stimulus -offset responses prior 

to the onset of the next stimulus . In each block, participants were instructed to detect two 

specific target identities (e.g., a specific face and a specific object out of the 20 possible 

identities ) among a series of stimuli . T his effectively divided the stimulus stream into three 

distinct classes of stimulus type . First, targets , were the specific identities which requir ed a

response . This was to ensure participants were attending to and completing the task. The 

second type were task -relevant non -targets , which were stimuli belonging to the same 

category as the targets ( e.g. other face identities ) but not matching the specific target identity 

in a given block . These stimuli were therefore relevant to the task at hand but did not require 

a motor response. The final type, task -irrelevant , were stimuli which did not belong to the 

same category as the targets. These were consciously perceived (i.e. suprathreshold) but were 

irrelevant to the current task. By counterbalancing the target categories across blocks (e.g., 

detecting faces or o bjects in one block, and l etters or f alse fonts in the next), the design 

ensured that every stimulus category served as both relevant and irrelevant throughout the 

experiment. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3. Schematic of the experimental design adapted from the Cogitate Consortium (2025) 

and the key trials selected in each step of the current analysis . Participants viewed a stream of 

suprathreshold stimuli from four categories (faces, objects, letters, and false fonts) presented for 

varying durations (0.5, 1.0, or 1.5 s) followed by a blank screen (2s minus stimulus duration) such that 

each stimulus and blank screen was presented for a total of 2s . The experiment employed a block 

design to manipulate task relevance. In "Face/object" blocks ( left stream ), participants were instructed 

to detect specific target identities (e.g., a specific face and object ). Stimuli were classified into three 

conditions: targets (red bars; target identities requiring a response), task -relevant (orange bars; non -

target stimuli belonging to the target category, e.g., other face /object identities), and task -irr elevant 

(purple bars; stimuli from non -target categories, e.g., letters /false -fonts ). In "Letter/false -font" blocks, 

the target categories were reversed, rendering letters and false fonts task -relevant while faces and 

objects became task -irrelevant. Note also that the coloured bars were not presented in the actual 

experiment and are only presented here to illustrate the different stimulus types. The bottom section 

shows the trials that made it to the main analysis in the current study , where first target st imuli and 

any 0.5s duration stimuli were excluded and all other trials with the face -specific GLM used to 

identify a face -specific network and a second GLM to identify an object -specific network, used for 

the control analysis . The red square denotes the main effect comparison made to identify each 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

stimulus specific network. From here, DCM s were inverted on only the task -irrelevant face trials for 

both face -specific and object -specific networks. 

MEG preprocessing 

Raw MEG data, acquired from 306 sensors (102 magnetometers, 204 planar 

gradiometers) was preprocessed using a combination of MNE -Python ( v1.8.0 ; Gramfort et 

al., 2014 ) and SPM12 ( https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/ ) in MATLAB 202 4b (The 

MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA). All data was pre -processed and analysed on the high -

performance computing platform, Spartan, at the University of Melbourne. This pipeline 

leveraged the strengths of MNE -Python for signal denoising (specifically, Maxwell filtering 

and FastICA) with SPM12 for its native support of DCM and Bayesian source reconstruction .

The r aw MEG data underwent Maxwell filtering (Signal -Space Separation ; SSS ; Taulu & 

Kajola, 2005) to su ppress environment al noise and sensor artefacts . Prior to SSS, noisy and 

flat channels were automatically detected using the “ find_bad_channels_maxwell ” function, 

with the aid of cross -talk compensation and calibration files. These marked bad channels 

were reconstructed during SSS. 

To remove artefactual sources in the data , ICA was computed on a separate copy of 

the continu ous sensor data after it was bandpass filtered from 1 to 40 Hz and downsampled to 

200Hz . Here, the FastICA algorithm (Hyvarinen, 1999) was used to extract as many 

components as necessary to explain 99% of the variance within each participant . Artefactual 

components, primarily those related to eye blinks and cardiac activity, were identified and 

then rejected via visual inspection of their topography and time course. An average of 3.19 

components (SD = 0.98 components ) were removed per participant across both batches. 

The cleaned continuous data was then converted to SPM readable format and the 

remaining preprocessing steps were completed in MATLAB . Bad segments were marked 

where channels exceeding a threshold of 5000fT or planar gradiometer channels exceeding 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

500 0fT/ cm were marked as artefactual. Trials containing such artifacts, or where more than 

20% of channels were bad, were subsequently marked for rejection. On average , 103 trials 

made it to the analysis stage for each participant .

To evaluate the distinct temporal predictions of the theories, the continuous data were 

branched into two separate epoching pipelines: one aligned to stimulus onset, and a second 

aligned to stimulus offset. 

For the onset aligned epochs , data from all stimulus categories were segmented into 

epochs spanning -100ms to 2 000ms relative to stimulus onset. Retaining both task -relevant 

and irrelevant trial types at this stage was necessary to allow for the subsequent GLM source 

contrasts (i.e., face trials versus all other stimulus types ). However, because we were 

specifically interested in sustained neural responses, trials with a 500ms stimulus duration 

were excluded; only the 1000ms and 1500ms duration trials were retained for analysis. 

To test the GNWT prediction of an offset ignition, a second set of e poch s were created 

for the 1000ms and 1500ms trials . Here, we were first re -aligned these trials to stimulus 

offset (defined as 0ms) and segmented into epochs spanning -100ms to 600ms relative to 

offset. 

For both the onset and offset aligned epochs, all trials within each condition using the 

robust averag ing procedure . This procedure down -weights outlier time points within trials 

before averaging. To remove any high -frequency noise potentially introduced by robust 

averaging, the averaged data were low -pass filtered at 40 Hz (Litvak et al., 2011) . Finally, 

baseline correction was applied using an interval of -100ms to 0ms relative to stimulus onset 

or offset . While th is baseline correction step for the offset -aligned epochs may not be a 

neutral resting state (i.e. the time window being baseline corrected is during face perception) ,

baseline correcting with respect to the offset was chosen to isolate the neural dynamics 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

evoked by the stimulus removal (i.e., during the updating of a percept at offset predicted by 

GNWT) .

Identifying regions of interest for the DCM analysis 

Source reconstruction was conducte d in SPM . Individual structural MRI scans were 

used in the inversion procedure to form a single shell model for each participant’s head mesh 

during the source reconstruction. In SPM, these individual meshes are generated by mapping 

and transforming their structural image against a canonical template brain, allowing for more 

robust solutions when creating the head meshes (Mattout et al., 2007; Ashburner et al., 2014). 

For those without a structural MRI scan (a total of five participants) , a template mesh was 

warped to the participant’s fiducials. Each participants’ cortical mesh had 8196 verti ces .

For the onset -locked data, these models were subsequently inverted using a greedy 

search algorithm across a time window of 0 to 2 000ms relative to stimulus onset, and a 

frequency window spanning from 0 to 256 Hz to capture all relevant cortical frequencies. The 

greedy search algorithm is a variant of the multiple sparse priors approach within SPM. To

ensure a consistent spatial model across both onset and offset effective connectivity analyse s,

the inverse solution derived from this broad 0 -2000ms window was subsequently used for the 

offset -locked epochs. As this inversion was used only to define a consistent spatial model for 

subsequent DCM analyses rather than to characterise temporal dynamics (which are modelled 

in the DCM analyses) the time window used for source reconstruction was not constrained to 

th e duration of the stimulus presentation. 

These source estimates were converted t o images for subsequent analysis, and we 

focused on capturing the peak sources of activation during the onset of the face stimulus 

within each region of interest (ROI) . As such, the images used in the subsequent GLM 

analy ses were created by projecting the source estimates onto a standard MNI mesh during a

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

time window of 0 to 600ms relative to stimulus onset . The resulting images were smoothed to 

12mm 3.

To adjudicate between GNWT and IIT, we required a network architecture capable of 

testing both posterior network processing and global broadcasting. Therefore, our models 

comprised three bilateral cortical levels. First, we required a lower visual node to receive the 

initial afferent visual input ( primary visual cortex ; V1). Second, we included a higher -level 

category -selective node relating to brain areas know n to be involved in processing of faces 

(FG). Anchoring the network around the FG was critical, as both theories make explicit, 

competing predictions regarding the temporal and directed connectivity of this specific node 

during face perception. Finally, we included a higher -order cognitive node to test for global 

workspace broad casting (PFC). 

To define the coordinates for each node within the DCM architecture, we took a 

hybrid approach driven by both the individual’s data and the key hypotheses of interest. A 2

x 2 full factorial generalised linear model (GLM) was fitted to the source reconstructed 

images for each participant separately . The 2 factors in the model were stimuli (face or all 

other stimuli; i.e. objects, letters, and false fonts ) and task -relevance (relevant or irrelevant). 

Both factors ’ levels were assumed to be dependent and have equal variance. For each ROI, an

anatomical mask was created separately for each hemisphere using J uBrain Anatomy Toolbox 

(Eickhoff et al. , 2005). To create the frontal mask, all frontal regions were selected ( Amunts 

et al., 1999; Amunts et al., 2004; Bludau et al., 2014 ; Hen ssen et al., 2016; Geyer , 2012 ;

Geyer et al., 1996 ). For the fusiform mask, all fusiform gyrus regions were selected (Caspers 

et al., 201 3; Lorenz et al., 201 7). And to create the V1 mask, the V1 region was selected 

(Amunts et al., 2000 ). For each contrast we analysed the main effect of face stimuli (i.e. faces 

> all other stimuli ) and t he peak coordinate was then extracted for each ROI constrained over 

the corresponding anatomical mask for each participant . This allowed us to optimise the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

specific MNI coordinate to the most robust voxel of activation elicited by faces for each 

participant, at each ROI. Additionally, we determined the regions demonstrating greater 

activation for objects compared to all other stimulus categories (i.e. objects > all other 

stimuli ). Models with these ROI coordinates were then compared against models using the 

face -specific ROI coordinates using Ba yesian model selection (which we cover in more detail 

below ). This analysis was conducted to test for the specificity of the face processing network ;

such that a network with peak activation for face stimuli should explain face stimuli better 

than a network whose peak activation occurs for objects. 

The custom -fitting of the DCM n etwork meant that, for each participant , the specific 

peak MNI coordinate fed into the DCM model was functionally localised for this contrast of 

interest. This procedure was especially important for the PFC nodes. GNWT considers the 

PFC broadly relevant and remains largely impartial to the subregions within the PFC which 

are specifically important . Further, as the PFC is quite large and we have previously found 

that PFC activation does not overlap much between participants ( Bandara et al., 2025 ), t his 

meant the group -level PFC coordinate may not be representative of each participant . Thus, 

this allowed us to best capture any influence from the PFC should they exist. 

Effective connectivity analysis 

Effective connectivity was estimated using DCM for evoked responses (David et al., 

2006) specified as an Equivalent Current Dipole (ECD) spatial model using a Jansen and Rit 

neural mass model (Jansen & Rit, 1995) . Only task -irrelevant faces were modelled here to 

minimise confounds of motor preparation for reporting .

As the temporal evolution of connectivity wa s an important empirical question here, 

we opted for a n expanding time -window a pproach (similar to Garrido et al., 2007) . H ere ,

separate DCMs were inverted for each participant in expanding time windows from 0ms to 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 00ms post -stimulus onset with 100ms increments (e.g. 0ms to 100ms, 0ms to 200ms, 0ms 

to 300ms, etc.) . The rationale of this expanding time -window approach was to track the 

model evidence across these time windows to identify when specific connections became 

necessary to explain the data , and if these remain ed necessary throughout the duration of the 

stimulus presentation. Similarly, t o test for offset responses, we ran another set of DCMs 

starting from 0ms to 300ms after stimulus offset and continuing up to 500ms in steps of 

100ms again ( i.e. 0ms to 300ms, 0ms to 400ms, and 0ms to 500ms post -stimulus offset) . Note 

that for these offset DCMs, the afferent input volley was specified exactly the same as the 

onset. That is, the input was specified over the early sensory nodes using a prior of 64ms and 

allowing the model to determine the precise input timing and duration. 

Hierarchical Bayesian modelling 

Once the expanding time -window DCMs were inverted for every participant ,

parametric empirical Bayesian (PEB) modelling was used to investigate the strength of the 

connectivity parameters at the group -level. This form of modelling involves conducting a 

second -order hierarchical Bayesian model over the connectivity parameters across the group 

(Friston et al., 2016) . As only one condition was modelled in this case, th e PEB was inverted 

over the A -matri x. Additionally, a s we modelled the DCMs across multiple time windows, we 

conducted one PEB on all participants per time window. 

To arbitrate between the theories, Bayesian model comparison was used to compare 

the fully connected model against reduced models where specific connections important to 

either theor y were "switched off". Switching off or removing connections is equivalent to 

fixing these connections at a prior mean of zero in log -scaling space , corresponding to their 

canonical default strength (in this case, 16Hz) . As comput ing the evidence for a given model ,

𝑃 (𝑦 |𝑚 ), is computationally intractable , this is approximated within the PEB framework as 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

free energy. Further, a s the free energies across different time windows are not comparable 

because they are derived from by different data (Stephan et al., 2010) , the difference in free 

energy was computed between the full and the reduced models within each time window. 

This difference was then converted to a posterior probability for the full model compared to 

the reduced model using the equation :

𝑃 (𝑚 𝑓𝑢𝑙𝑙 |y) = 1

> 1+𝑒𝑥𝑝 (∆𝐹 )

,

where  ∆𝐹  represents the log Bayes factor in favor of the reduced model ( that is, 

𝐹 𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒𝑑 − 𝐹 𝑓𝑢𝑙𝑙 ). 

Theoretical translation and model specification 

To test the key predictions of GNWT, that conscious perception re lies on a transient 

prefrontal broadcasting at stimulus onset and offset, we constructed a reduced model where 

bilateral backward connections from the PFC to the FG were removed . If the full model (with 

PFC feedback) ha d meaningfully higher free energy compared to th e reduced model, it would 

support the GNWT prediction that PFC feedback is necessary for conscious perception . That 

is to say, this would suggest that removing PFC feedback connections impacts the model’s 

explanatory power, and hence those connections are important to explain the data . As GNWT 

predicts this response should occur within 300 -500ms of stimulus onset (prediction 1) or 

offset (prediction 2) , we compared these reduced PEBs to the full model for each of these 

time window s separately and then computed their posterior proba bility. 

To test the predictions of IIT , that conscious perception requires a sustained content -

specific neural response tracking the duration of the percept, we constructed a reduced model 

by switching off key connections within a posterior content specific network – specifically ,

backward connections from the FG to V1 (prediction 1) . Again, e vidence favo uring the full 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

model over this reduced version , would support IIT ’s prediction of posterior integration. 

Because IIT hypothesises posterior integration should be sustained for the duration of the 

perception (from 300ms onwards) , the PEBs were compared for each time point starting from 

0ms to 300ms and up until 1000ms relative to stimulus onset. 

As a further test of IIT, we investigated whether t he sustained response in the 

‘posterior hot zone’ might manifest as sustained self -connectivity within the content specific 

region (i.e. the FG ). To do so, we analysed the G -matrix of the DCM , specifically, its 

excitatory receptor density parameters (He). While th ese parameters are not explicitly a

connectivity parameter, as Kiebel et al. (2007) have demonstrated , they behave like one ; as 

they increase the overall influence the subpopulation s within a cortical column have on each 

other , such that changes in these parameters modulate the magnitude of the overall activity 

within a n area/node .

Consequently , these parameters serve as a suitable proxy to the node’s intrinsic 

connectivity. For this test , we performed an automated PEB search to track the posterior 

probability that intrinsic connections in the FG were needed to explain the data . This process 

involves perform ing Bayesian model reduction to search across a vast model space by 

switching off connections in the model iteratively , comparing these models to a fully 

connected model, and then pruning redundant connections which do not positively contribute 

to the overall model evidenc e. Bayesian model averaging (BMA) is then performed over the 

parameters of the final set of models to yield an estimate of the group -level connectivity 

parameters . We then trac ed the posterior probability of these connections over time from 0ms 

to 100 to 1000ms within the FG. 

In the context of DCM, where local (intrinsic) dynamics are parameterized by the 

excitatory post -synaptic gain of a node, any such sustained activity that cannot be explained 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

by extrinsic parameters would be mathematically absorbed by this intrinsic parameter 

(Friston et al., 2003; Kiebel et al., 2007) . Therefore, we can treat the self -connectivity FG 

parameter as a proxy for the region’s specific involvement in a self -sustained complex –

irrespective of whether that complex is localised within the FG or a larger network. In this 

context, sustained evidence for intrinsic connectivity in the FG would support the hypothesis 

that this region is involved in a sustained network during stimulus viewing. 

All results here are reported as the posterior probability of the connection being 

present using a threshold of pp > 0.95, which constitutes strong evidence for the necessity of 

the connection s to explain the data (Kass & Raftery, 1995) .

Bayesian Model Selection 

As a final test, we evaluated content specific ity of the DCM network to face 

processing post -hoc. To do so , a validation analysis was run to compare the face -specific 

network against object processing . Here, identical DCMs were run using an object -specific 

network (i.e. taking the p eak MNI coordinates when contrasting objects against all other 

stimulus categories ). These DCMs were inverted across the same expanding time windows 

(from 0 –100ms up to 0 –1000ms). Random -effects (RFX) BMS (Stephan et al., 2009) was 

then employed to compare the models at the group level. For each time window, we 

computed the protected exceedance probability ( PEP ), which measures the probability that a 

given model is more likely than any other model tested, over and above chance (Rigoux et 

al., 2014). This provided a test of whether the face -specific network provided a more 

parsimonious explanation of the empirical data than the generic object network , suggesting 

that the DCM network was specific to faces. It is worthwhile noting t hat these analyses were 

conducted after the primary hypothesis -driven DCM inversions were complete and is 

reported here in the order in which it was conducted. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Results 

Nodes identified for DCM analysis 

We extracted the peak MNI coordinate for each participant resulting from the main 

effect of face stimuli , for each node to account for individual variability. This node 

optimization process was particularly important for the PFC nodes, where prefrontal 

activation exhibited a high level of between -subject variability (see Table 1) . To summarise 

the spatial location of this network, we compute d the mean and spread (standard deviation) of 

the individual peak coordinates determined in the source reconstruction procedure . As shown 

in Figure 4, these group -average coordinates represent the spatial centre for each of the 

modelled ROIs. Furthermore, the size of each spherical no de reflects the between -subject 

spatial variability at that source, derived from the mean standard deviation across the x, y, and 

z dimensions. The resulting group -average coordinates across both datasets corresponded to 

bilateral early visual cortex (V1/V2; BA17/18), the fusiform gyrus (Fusiform Face Area ;

BA37), and the inferior frontal gyrus (PFC; BA45). The source inversion yielded a mean 

variance explained for the source so lution of 77.36% (SD = 5.05%) for the discovery batch 

and 76.88% (SD = 3.90%) for the validation batch, indicating a robust fit of the forward 

model to the sensor data. One participant in the validation batch failed to show any 

suprathreshold activation in the left PFC node. As such, for this participant, the group -level 

(specifically, at the batch -level) peak coordinate was used for that node. 

Region of Interest  Brodmann Area  x (SD)  y (SD)  z (SD) 

L Early Visual (V1)  BA 18  -6.5 (5.5)  -89.1 (6.9)  -0.6 (10.4) 

R Early Visual (V1)  BA 17  12.0 (7.2)  -91.4 (7.9)  -0.1 (7.5) 

L Fusiform ( FG ) BA 37  -41.9 (6.0)  -59.8 (15.0)  -16.7 (5.2) 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

R Fusiform ( FG ) BA 37  41.5 (4.8)  -60.6 (12.5)  -15.1 (5.0) 

L Prefrontal (PFC)  BA 45  -29.3 (15.6)  21.7 (24.0)  8.6 (33.1) 

R Prefrontal (PFC)  BA 45  29.0 (17.2)  26.3 (27.2)  10.4 (29.0) 

Table 1 . Group -average MNI coordinates and corresponding Brodmann Area . Coordinates represent 

the mean peak MNI location across participants. SD denotes the standard deviation of the distance 

from the mean coordinate for each axis .

Figure 4. Group -average source locations across both batches for the six -node DCM network. Nodes 

are centred at the mean peak MNI coordinates across all participants across both batches , derived 

from individual subject -level GLM contrasts (faces > objects) within anatomical ROI masks. Sphere 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

size reflects the spatial variability of peak locations across participants, derived from the mean 

standard deviation across the x, y, and z dimensions at each source .

Testing PFC to FG connectivity at onset and offset 

We focused our analyses on testing only the specific connections required to evaluate 

the predictions of GNWT and IIT. To demonstrate replicability, we report the findings for the 

discovery batch first, followed immediately by the corresponding results fro m the 

independent validation batch for each prediction. 

To test GNWT ’s first prediction , we used Bayesian model comparison (BMC) to 

compare a fully connected model against a reduced model where bilateral backward 

connections from the PFC to the FG were "switched off" (fixed at a prior mean of zero in log -

space ; see Figure 5 a). In our initial discovery stage analysis, we observed strong evidence (pp 

> 0.95) for the necessity of key GNWT connections during the 300 –500ms window post -

stimulus onset . These results were replicated in the validation batch (pp > .95). 

Equivalently, we ran the same set of analyses at stimulus offset to test GNWT’s 

second prediction . Again, w e compared a full model against a reduced one without feedback 

connections from the PFC to the FG . Across both the validation and discovery datasets, we 

observed strong evidence (pp > 0.95) for the necessity of the full model containing key 

GNWT connections, however start ing from 4 00ms window post -stimulus onset (pp > .95) .

These findings are in line with the GNWT prediction of a phasic "ignition" event at offset .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 5. Expanding Time -Window Bayesian Model Comparison of Reduced DCMs Test s of 

GNWT and IIT . Each panel assesses the necessity of specific connect ions predicted by GNWT or 

IIT . Here, evidence for the full model is compared against reduced models where those connections 

were "switched off" (log -scaling parameters were fixed at zero) . On the left of each panel is a 

schematic illustrating the set of connections being evaluated (highlighted in orange). On the right are 

line plots showing the time course of the posterior probability ( pp) t hat these specific connections are 

necessary to explain the data. In e ach panel , the top graph shows the discovery dataset and the bottom 

graph shows the independent validation dataset. A) Test of GNWT ’s predictions 1 and 2 of prefrontal 

ignition at stimulus onset and offset. The analysis evaluates the necessity of long -range top -down 

feedback from PFC to FG. Separate models were run for stimulus onset (orange lines) and stimulus 

offset (blue lines) to test for "ignition" event s. B) Test of IIT prediction 1 . The analysis evaluate d the 

necessity of feedback between V1 and FG. Sustained high probability ( pp > 0.95) indicates strong 

evidence for the putative posterior network connections being necessary to explain the data for each 

time step . C) Test of IIT prediction 2. This analysis examined sustained intrinsic connectivity within 

FG . The analysis evaluates the necessity of the excitatory gain parameter (a proxy for intrinsic 

connectivity within the node; Kiebel et al., 2007) within the fusiform gyru s (FG) nodes at each time 

step . In all plots, the y -axis represents the posterior probability that the relevant 

connections/parameters are necessary for model fit. The dotted black line at pp = 0.95 indicates the 

threshold for strong evidence. The shaded orange background indicates the period where the visual 

stimulus was present on screen. 

Testing sustained FG connectivity 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To test IIT ’s first prediction , we again used BMC to compare a fully connected model 

against a reduced model where the key connection s IIT deems necessary for conscious face 

perception were switched off (i.e. feedback FG to V1 connections ; see Figure 5 b). In the 

discovery batch, feedback from FG to V1 did not show a sustained response t hroughout the 

stimulus duration , with the posterior probability of the connections only being necessary to 

explain the data (pp > 0.95) for only two (non -successive) time windows out of the eight 

time -windows tested. Similarly, in the validation dataset we did not observe a sustained 

response from the FG to V1 throughout stimulus presentation . While evidence for these 

backward connections was initially robust (pp > 0.95 between 300ms and 500ms), the 

posterior probability subsequently dropped, fluctuating around the inconclusive threshold (pp 

≈ 0.50) for much of the later time windows, before une xpectedly rebounding to strong 

evidence in the final 1000ms window. 

Notably, in our tests we observed substantial volatility in the posterior probabilities 

(e.g., the sharp drops in evidence at time windows ending at 600ms and 700ms followed by a 

rebound at later windows in the discovery batch). We sought to rule out that there might have 

been inversion failures in the underlying DCMs ; specifically that certain time windows may 

have been stuck in local (c.f. global) optima of free energy . Because each time window is 

inverted independently, a poor inversion at one window (but not its neighbours) could in 

principle produce a spurious drop in group -level evidence that reflects an optimisation failure 

rather than a bona fide change in coupling. To test this possibility , we examined the mean 

first -level free energy across the expanding time windows. Because free energy scales with 

the amount of data being modelled, and each successive window incorporates more 

peristimulus samples, the mean free e nergy would be expected to decline smoothly and 

monotonically as the window lengthens. If the observed volatility in posterior probability was 

indeed driven by inversion failures, it would be expected that these would coincide with 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

corresponding spikes in mean free energy in the DCMs for those time windows . Our 

assessments confirmed that the mean free energy (an approximation of model evidence) 

behaved as expected for both discovery and validation batches, indicating a stable model 

convergence (that is, the dips in the group -level posterior probabilities did not correspond to 

dips in free energy at the first -level DCMs; see Figure 7). 

We subsequently examined the temporal evolution of the group -level connectivity 

strengths against the main results for the first prediction (Figure 7C and D) . This inspection 

revealed that the group -level connectivity strengths (and their credibility intervals) shrank 

towards zero during time windows where the posterior probabilities dropped. Subsequently, 

an inspection of the connectivity parameters at some later time windows revealed that a late -

stage rebound in posterior probability was primarily driven by a strong decrease in 

connectivity. 

For IIT ’s second prediction , we evaluated intrinsic connectivity via the G-matrix in 

DCM (see Figure 5 c). In the discovery set, there was evidence for sustained intrinsic 

connectivity within the FG from 300ms onwards. Although the posterior probability of the 

parameter be ing needed to explain the data fell to an inconclusive level at the 600ms time 

window, it rebounded in subsequent windows returning to ab ove the 95% threshold for the 

remainder of the epoch and finishing with positive evidence (pp ≈ 0.78; Kass & Raftery, 

1995) . This behaviour was not replicated in the in the validation dataset however , where we 

observed the necessity of this parameter sustained in all time windows for the entire stimulus 

duration (pp >0.95). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 7. First -level convergence diagnostics and group -level Parametric Empirical Bayes 

(PEB) parameter estimates across expanding time windows. Here, in the discovery ( A) and 

validation ( B) datasets, we highlight the gradual decrease in mean free energy across all participants 

demonstrates expected model behaviour as the time window length increases (A and B; free energy is 

related to, among other things, the number of samples being modelle d), and a lack of a substantial dip 

at the corresponding time windows where posterior probabilities dip confirms the absence of gradient 

ascent inversion failures (i.e. local maxima problem). Having established this, we then plot the group -

mean effective c onnectivity parameters for the IIT feedback connections tested (fusiform gyrus [FG] 

to primary visual cortex [V1]) in the discovery ( C) and validation ( D) datasets. The transient dip of 

these estimates towards the prior value of 16Hz (dashed line) coincides with the observed drops in 

posterior probability for the full model as seen in the corresponding test of IIT (prediction 1 ; i.e. at 

time windows ending at 600ms and 700ms in the discovery batch). Note, in A and B, error bars 

indicate between -subject stan dard deviation. In, C and D, blue lines represent right -hemispheric 

connections and orange lines represent left -hemispheric connections. Error bars denote 90% Bayesian 

credibility intervals. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Bayesian model selection control analysis 

Following the testing of each theory’s predictions , we sought to empirically validate 

the content -specificity of our network architecture. RFX -BMS was used to confirm whether 

the face -specific network provided a more parsimonious explanation of the data than an 

object -specific network when modelling face trials . For each time window, the PEP was 

computed to determine which model provided a more parsimonious account of the data, over 

and above chance. For both the discovery and validation batches, the PEP across the 

expanding time windows revealed a trend favouring the face -specific network but did not 

reach the threshold for strong evidence at any time window in either dataset (see Figure 6). 

Figure 6. Bayesian model selection comparing face -specific and object -specific network s when 

modelling face trials . Protected exceedance probability (PEP) for the discovery (A) and validation 

(B) dataset across expanding time windows. The face -specific network (orange squares) generally 

provides a more parsimonious fit than the object -specific network (blue circles), remaining mostly 

above chance (PEP = 0.50). However, it does not surpass the thres hold for strong evidence (PEP > 

0.95) at any time window. Overall, while data trend s positively towards face -specificity, the absence 

of strong evidence indicates that these content -specific connectivity differences should be interpreted 

with caution , as t he data may not be well -suited to draw strong conclusions. 

Discussion 

In this study, we re -analysed the Cogitate Consortium ’s (2025) MEG dataset using 

effective connectivity methods to adjudicate between two popular theories of consciousness, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

IIT and GNWT. Across four different predictions, we found results consistent with both 

GNWT predictions , while IIT ’s first prediction was challenged and somewhat consistent on 

the second prediction . Despite r esults for these predictions broadly being replicated across 

both batches of analysis, a subsequent validation analysis comparing a face -specific network 

to an object -specific network to test for the content -specificity of the results only trended 

positive and did not reach the threshold for strong evidence. This suggests the data, especially 

for the IIT predictions, may not be suited to draw strong conclusions. 

Data consistent with GNWT prediction of an onset and offset ignition 

GNWT posits that a late , non -linear response (an ignition) amplifies and broadcasts 

information through long -range feedback from the prefrontal cortex to higher sensory areas. 

This ignition is proposed to occur within 300 –500ms of both stimulus onset and offset . While 

the original Cogitate findings only observed evidence for the former , in our analysis, we 

observed findings consistent with both the onset and offset ignition .

Th e prediction of an ignition at stimulus offset represents a key point of divergence 

between GNWT and other theories of consciousness . This prediction may be considered a 

“bold” prediction of the theory (Negro, 2024) ; which are valuable because these predictions 

are unlikely to emerge in the data if the theory is false . While it seems counterintuitive that 

the brain would transmit signals from the PFC to higher -sensory regions after a stimulus is no 

longer present, GNWT predicts a n ignition event after the offset of the current percept as it 

marks an update of the workspace to the new content (e.g., the fixation screen) . Indeed, the 

presence of this response, while we cannot be certain that it is directly related to 

consciousness per se (see discussion below ), is a unique prediction from GNWT which has 

robustly held up in these analyses for both the discovery and validation datasets . In effect, the 

presence of a response consistent with an offset ignition provides stronger support for the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

specific broadcasting mechanisms predicted by GWNT than the presence of an onset ignition 

alone .

It is worth addressing why a discrepancy has emerged between our findings and the 

previous analyses in relation to the presence of an offset ignition . One possibility is that the 

original Cogitate study focused on activity in the high -gamma band . This frequency -band 

was originally chosen because high -gamma band activity correlates with neural spiking 

(Manning et al., 2009 ). However, GNWT does accommodate for other spectral activity also .

For instance, that distinct spectral signatures may underli e feedforward versus feedback 

signalling ; such that bottom -up propagation is carried by gamma, and top -down broadcasting 

emerg ing primarily in the alpha -beta frequency range (Bastos et al., 2015; Mashour et al., 

2020; Mejias et al., 2016) . Therefore, it remains consistent with the theory for spectral ranges 

outside of gamma to underlie ignition events. While DCM for evoked responses are not able 

to tease apart the distinct influences of different spectral ranges (see DCM for the complex 

cross spectra instead; Friston et al., 2012) , by restricting their analysis to high -gamma , it is 

possible the Cogitate Consortium filtered out lower -band top -down broadcast ing . In contrast, 

our DCM analysis utilized the full spectrum of the evoked response, potentially capturing the 

low -frequency bands (theta, alpha, beta) that the theory identifies as important for feedback 

and global updating. 

It is also important to note that, unlike the IIT analyses, the GNWT predictions tested 

here are less directly contingent on the network being uniquely face -selective. The finding 

that PFC feedback to higher -sensory regions is necessary to explain the data within the 

predicted 300 –500ms windows remains broadly consistent with GNWT's account , even if the 

observed connectivity patterns partly reflect general visual processing. Nonetheless, the 

absence of (strong) face specificity in the BMS validation analysis means we cannot be 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

certain that the observed ignition uniquely reflects the broadcasting of face -specific conscious 

content, as opposed to a more generic updating of the workspace. 

Data consistent with IIT prediction of sustained FG connectivity 

To evaluate the predictions of IIT, we first tested the necessity of sustained effective 

connectivity within a posterior cortical network . S pecifically, testing whether feedback 

connections between the Fusiform Gyrus (FG) and V1 are necessary to explain the data 

throughout the stimulus duration . This is because IIT posits that the physical substrate of a 

conscious experience (the "main complex") must exist as a maxi ma of irreducible integrated 

information, typically localized to a posterior "hot zone" . Unlike the phasic "ignition" of 

GNWT, this cause -effect structure must be sustained for the duration of the experience .

This first test challenged the hypothesis that the feedback connections from higher 

category selective areas to lower areas w as needed to explain the data . In both the discovery 

and validation datasets, while these connections were necessary to explain the data in som e

time windows , this effect was not sustained across the entire stimulus duration. 

Interestingly, this failure to find sustained connectivity between early visual areas and 

the FG replicates the findings of the original Cogitate analyses. The Consortium similarly 

observed that synchrony between early visual areas and category -selective areas was early 

and transient, challenging the theory’s prediction of sustained posterior synchrony. This 

failure to observe connectivity between these regions across both sets of analyses provides 

converging evidence that the absence of a sustained effect is likely not due to other factors 

(e.g. the high gamma -band frequencies analysed , as with GNWT ) and suggests that these 

sustained responses are likely not present in the data. 

Notably, in our tests we observed sub stantial volatility in the posterior probabilities 

(e.g., the sharp drops in evidence at time windows ending at 6 00ms and 700ms followed by a 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

rebound at later windows in the discovery batch ). We first sought to rule out fundamental 

inversion failures at the first -level DCMs. Our assessments confirmed that the mean free 

energy (an approximation of model evidence) behaved as expected for both discovery and 

validation batches , indicating a stable model convergence (that is, the dips in the group -level 

posterior probabilities did not correspond to dips in free energy at the first -level DCMs; see 

Figure 7). 

We subsequently examined the temporal evolution of the group -level connectivity 

strengths against the main results for prediction one (Figure 7C and D ). This inspection 

revealed that the group -level connectivity strengths (and their credibility intervals) shrank 

towards zero during time windows where the posterior probabilities dropped . Subsequently ,

an inspection of the connectivity parameters at some late r time windows revealed that a late -

stage rebound in posterior probability was primarily driven by a strong decrease in 

connectivity . It is beyond the scope of the present study to interpret the directions of these 

effects and why they occurred in this dataset, especially given that our continuous viewing 

paradigm necessarily entails a mixture of cognitive processing . However, the overarching 

interpretation is that t he volatility of this parameter across the expanding time windows 

challenges the prediction that there is sustained , continuous connectivity between the FG and 

V1 in this data. Accordingly, the addition of small temporal increments can drastically alter 

the relative model evidence of the tested model .

For the second IIT prediction , we also evaluated the stability of intrinsic connectivity 

within the FG nodes. This analysis may be considered a more direct test of IIT , given its 

predict ion of flexibility of the precise spatiotemporal boundaries of the 'main complex', which 

is capable of expanding, contracting, or shifting based on the specific conscious contents 

(Tononi & Koch, 2015) . Therefore, because it is possible the posterior network we tested 

above did not overlap entirely with the actual main complex predicted by IIT to underlie 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

conscio us perception , we focused on the FG , which is considered a n established substrate of 

conscious face perception (Koch et al., 2016) . We reason ed that the underlying main complex 

must necessarily invoke th is substrate within its network , irrespective of the broader network 

it is a part of .

The discovery dataset showed mostly sustained connectivity throughout the stimulus 

duration. Although the posterior probability of the intrinsic parameter fluctuated and briefly 

dropped to an inconclusive level in one time window, it rebounded to strong evidence in 

subsequent windows, concl uding with positive evidence by the final time window. The 

independent validation set confirmed this sustained response, exhibiting strong evidence of 

sustained intrinsic connectivity throughout the entire stimulus durati on. 

It is important to stress that the strength of this evidence is contingent upon the 

specificity of these findings to conscious face processing. This is because IIT predicts that the 

neural substrate of experience corresponds to the precise phenomenological content of the 

conscious percept — in this case, faces. Accordingly , a posterior network that responds most 

robustly to faces should explain face connectivity better than a network that responds most to 

objects. Whilst there was positive evidence that our BMS analysis favoured the face -specific 

network over the object network at most time windows , this preference did not reach the 

threshold for strong evidence at any time window across both datasets . Accordingly, while 

the broader pattern of sustained intrinsic connectivity within the FG is consistent with IIT, 

strong claims cannot be made from this data that these effect s were unique to face -specific 

conscious processing. 

The absence of face -selectivity in this data based on the BMS results may be related 

to two factors. First, MEG has relatively limit ed spatial resolution (compared to other 

techniques, such as fMRI ). Though the MEG dataset was chosen here specifically for its 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

excellent temporal resolution to test key spatiotemporal predictions, the re may have been 

spatial leakage in the source estimates . The consequence is that resulting source estimates for 

both the face - and object -specific DCMs may be relatively similar even if the latent neural 

dynamics are face -selective. Second, while the FFA sits within the FG , the broader FG is not 

exclusively a face -selective region and has been shown to respond to a range of complex 

visual categories, including objects, bodies, and words, with selectivity emerging from fine -

grained subregional organisation (Binder et al., 2009; Peelen & Downing, 2005; Weiner & 

Grill -Spector, 2012; Weiner & Zilles, 2016) . The spatial proximity of these higher category -

selective and face -selective subregions, in combination with the relatively lower spatial 

resolution of the MEG , may have contributed to the object -specific DCM network being 

difficult to strongly dissociate from the face -specific network. 

The transient dip in evidence at the 600ms window in the discovery set could be 

related to the local maxima problem . Because DCM employs variational Laplace to 

iteratively optimize free energy (Friston et al., 2007) , the algorithm can occasionally become 

trapped in a local maximum in this optimisation process, rather than the global maxima. 

However, given the subsequent recovery of these parameters, coupled with the replication in 

the validation cohort, it is plausib le this dip reflects the algorithm converging on a non -

optimal solution at this time window specifically, and not the others tested. This is a 

challenge inherent to our expanding time window approach, and we discuss this limitation in 

more detail below. 

Functional Connectivity vs Effective Connectivity 

One intriguing aspect of these analyses are the fact that they diverge from some of the 

key findings from the Cogitate Consortium ’s original analyses of the data. Specifically, while 

the original study presented a mixed verdict , finding partial support for both theories but 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

failing to robustly observe the "ignition" or "sustained maintenance" predictions in full, our 

DCM analysis yielded broad, robust support for GNWT predictions and a more nuanced, yet 

still broadly consistent results with IIT. 

This divergence may stem from the fundamental difference between functional and 

effective connectivity . The Cogitate Consortium extensively analysed the data using 

functional connectivity measures . At its core, these metrics quantify statistical dependencies 

rather than directed influence s. Consequently, they are susceptible to confounds, where 

correlations between two regions can be driven by a third source rather than direct 

interaction, or by fluctuations in signal -to -noise ratios independent of coupling changes 

between the ROIs (Friston, 2011) . In contrast, DCM assesses effective connectivity , the 

directed influence one neural system exerts over another. By explicitly modelling the 

underlying neuronal architecture and distinguishing feedback from feedforward connectivity, 

DCM is able to investigate the directed influences underlying broadcasting and maintenance 

that correlational measures may not be able to directly assess .

Limitations 

A primary limitation concerns the content -specificity of the network architecture. 

Although the DCM network was anchored to the FG on the basis of its established role in 

face perception (Kanwisher et al., 1997), and the face -specific network broadly had positive 

evidence over the object -specific network in the BMS analysis, this preference did not reach 

the threshold for strong evidence (PEP > 0.95) at any time window. Consequently, the 

possibility that the observed connectivity patterns , particularly the sustained intrinsic FG 

connectivity interpreted in relation to IIT , may reflect more general visual processing 

common to multiple stimulus categories cannot be definitively excluded. Future studies 

employing within -subject paradigms that directly contrast seen versus unseen stimuli, or that 

include null -stimulus baselines, would afford a more rigorous test of content -specificity. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

A further methodological constraint o f ou r temporal analyses relates to the GNWT 

predict ion of a transient ignition approximately occurring within 300 to 500ms post -onset and 

offset . However, DCM for evoked responses evaluates network connectivity within an entire 

window and requires a fixed starting point at time zero to capture the initial sensory drive that 

perturbs the network (David et al., 2006) . Consequently, our expanding window approach 

evaluated network dynamics across the broader 0 to 500ms epoch, rather than isolating the 

300 to 500ms window as a n independent window . Specifically, because the later neural 

dyn amics are dependent on the initial timepoints , we cannot definitively claim that 

connections at the time windows ending at 300 -500ms are uniquely necessary to explain the 

data ; independent of the preceding time windows .

Similar ly, this expanding time -window approach also adds caveats to the 

interpretation of our IIT tests . Specifically, b ecause each successive time window is 

accumulative (i.e. includes data from preceding windows ) and because DCM fits a generative 

model to the entire evoked response waveform, we cannot rule out that the resulting posterior 

estimates are strongly weighted by early, high -amplitude evoked responses at stimulus onset 

and remain inflated in later time windows primaril y due to activity early time windows . Put 

differently, genuine sustained connectivity in late time windows may be indistinguishable 

from phasic connectivity that is driven by strong early evoked responses. 

However, in both cases, if the model s tested require d a reduction in connectivity 

within the tested time windows to fit the data, this would indicate the model cannot support 

sustained processing or late -stage ignitio n under any parameterization. Therefore, w hile a

negative result (i.e. a reduction in posterior probability at the tested time windows ) would 

conclusively challenge either theory , a positive result (i.e. strong posterior probability at the 

tested time windows ), as demonstrated here, should be interpreted with caution . Thus, our 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

tests in principle can only convincingly refute the theories but not unequivocally support 

them .

An additional limitation concerns the robustness of the DCM inversion scheme ,

especially when inverted overlapping data, as is the case with our expanding time window 

approach . The inversion of DCM relies on the variational Laplace, an optimization regime 

that seeks to iteratively maximize the negative free energy ( an approximation for the log 

model evidence). However, this optimization is non -trivial because the free energy landscape 

often contains multiple local maxima. Consequently, this carries a risk of converging on a 

local rather than global maximum (Daunizeau et al., 2011) . Since our analysis involved 

inverting models across expanding time windows independently, this risk is amplified. That 

is, the optimization scheme may converge on different local solutions for adjacent time 

windows . Although, most of our results replicated across batches, it could be that instable 

estimates explains the few discrepant patterns of results; e.g. the slight differences between 

the discovery and validation datasets for the posterior ( FG -V1 ) test . Specifically, the failure 

to replicat e the con nectivity pattern across these datasets may instead be the result of some 

time windows not converg ing upon the global maxim a of free energy. In this scenario, the 

observed divergence would reflect a limitation of the optimization algorithm, rather than a 

genuine instability of the underlying effect. 

A broader clarifying point is that the predictions tested from either theory w ere not 

mutually exclusive. Instead, we aimed to determine whether the predicted pattern of results 

for a given theory was present in the data. Consequently, we did not pit the theories against 

each other in a single model space. Such a comparison would be in appropriate for this 

dataset, primarily because the neural signal contains a mixture of conscious processing, 

sensory encoding, and other cognitive processing (such as attenti on, insofar as these 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

processes are considered separable; see Koch & Tsuchiya, 2007; Pitts et al., 2018) . Therefore, 

here we were unable to compare the relative model evidence of each theory. 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, this study adjudicates between two leading theories of consciousness, 

IIT and GNWT, by investigating effective connectivity changes during conscious face 

perception. The results were consistent with both predictions of GNWT and one prediction of 

IIT, though these findings must be interpreted with important caveats due to a post -hoc 

validation analysis failing to show strong evidence that the networks tested were specific for 

faces . For our tests of GNWT, we identified robust evidence consistent with a late prefrontal 

ignition at stimulus onset and also at offset, the latter finding not observed by the Cogitate 

Consortium’s original analyses. For IIT, w hile the initial test of poste rior feedback did not 

show sustained connectivity , challenging a key IIT prediction , we observed intrinsic 

connectivity consistent with a sustained response within the FG . However, as a follow -up 

BMS v alidation analysis did not reach the threshold for strong evidence, this finding should 

be interpreted cautiously as the data may not be well -suited to draw firm conclusions specific 

to face -processing. Additionally, a s our time windows are cumulative, we cannot rule out that 

sustained intrinsic connectivity observed for IIT predictions or late prefrontal ignition 

observed for GNWT, are at least partially driven by strong connectivity in earlier time 

windows, which may drive neural dynamics at later (tested) time wi ndows. 

Ultimately, this study highlights the importance of falsification -based frameworks in 

the neuroscience of consciousness. By design, both the experimental design and our 

analytical approach shared an epistemic asymmetry , such that they were primarily designed 

to challeng e theories rather than confirming them. Because positive evidence must be 

interpreted cautiously in this context (due to the absence of an unseen baseline condition and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the cumulative nature of our expanding time windows) our models are (in principle ) most 

informative when demonstrating that a predicted causal mechanism was statistically absent. 

While DCM is a rigorous tool for testing a priori hypotheses , its utility depends on the degree 

to which these hypotheses are precise . Continuing to translate broad theoretical constructs 

into testable, directed network models will be fruitful for elucidating the spatiotemporal 

mechanism underlying consciousness. 

Code availability 

https://github.com/kbandara/cogitate_dcm 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank Karl Friston , Peter Zeidman , Pranay Yadav and the members of the SPM 

methods group, Lucia Melloni’s research group, and Heleen Slagter’s research group for their 

helpful discussions and feedback. We are also grateful to the Cogitate Consortium for 

collecting this data and making it publicly available . This research was supported by The 

University of Melbourne’s Research Computing Services and the Petascale Campus 

Initiative. This research was supported by the Commonwealth through an Australian 

Government Research Training Program Scholarship (DOI:  https://doi.org/10.82133/C42F -

K220 ) and the Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences PhD Studentship. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 

Amunts, K., Malikovic, A., Mohlberg , H., Schormann, T., & Zilles, K. (2000). Brodmann's 

areas 17 and 18 brought into stereotaxic space —where and how 

variable?. Neuroimage , 11 (1), 66 -84. 

Amunts, K., Schleicher, A., Bürgel, U., Mohlberg, H., Uylings, H. B., & Zilles, K. (1999). 

Broca's region revisited: cytoarchitecture and intersubject variability. Journal of 

Comparative Neurology , 412 (2), 319 -341. 

Amunts, K., Weiss, P. H., Mohlberg, H., Pieperhoff , P., Eickhoff, S., Gurd, J. M., ... & Zilles, 

K. (2004). Analysis of neural mechanisms underlying verbal fluency in 

cytoarchitectonically defined stereotaxic space —the roles of Brodmann areas 44 and 

45. Neuroimage , 22 (1), 42 -56. 

Ashburner, J., Barnes, G., Chen, C. C., Daunizeau, J., Flandin, G., Friston, K., ... & Penny, W. 

(2014). SPM12 manual. Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, London, 

UK , 2464 (4), 53. 

Bludau, S., Eickhoff, S. B., Mohlberg, H., Caspers, S., Laird, A. R., Fox, P. T., ... & Amunts, 

K. (2014). Cytoarchitecture, probability maps and functions of the human frontal 

pole. Neuroimage , 93 , 260 -275. 

Caspers, J., Zilles, K., Eickhoff, S. B., Schleicher, A., Mohlberg, H., & Amunts, K. (2013). 

Cytoarchitectonical analysis and probabilistic mapping of two extrastriate areas of the 

human posterior fusiform gyrus. Brain Structure and Function , 218 (2), 511 -526. 

Eickhoff, S. B., Stephan, K. E., Mohlberg, H., Grefkes, C., Fink, G. R., Amunts, K., & Zilles, 

K. (2005). A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic maps 

and functional imaging data. Neuroimage , 25 (4), 1325 -1335. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Ferrante, O., Liu, L., Minarik, T., Gorska, U., Ghafari, T., Luo, H., & Jensen, O. (2022). 

FLUX: A pipeline for MEG analysis. NeuroImage , 253 , 119047. 

Geyer, S. (2012). The microstructural border between the motor and the cognitive domain in 

the human cerebral cortex. 

Geyer, S., Ledberg, A., Schleicher, A., Kinomura, S., Schormann, T., Bürgel, U., ... & Roland, 

P. E. (1996). Two different areas within the primary motor cortex of 

man. Nature , 382 (6594), 805 -807. 

Gramfort , A., Luessi, M., Larson, E., Engemann, D. A., Strohmeier, D., Brodbeck, C., ... & 

Hämäläinen, M. S. (2014). MNE software for processing MEG and EEG 

data. NeuroImage , 86 , 446 -460. 

Henssen, A., Zilles, K., Palomero -Gallagher, N., Schleicher, A., Mohlberg, H., Gerboga, F., ... 

& Amunts, K. (2016). Cytoarchitecture and probability maps of the human medial 

orbitofrontal cortex. Cortex , 75 , 87 -112. 

Lorenz, S., Weiner, K. S., Caspers, J., Mohlberg, H., Schleicher, A., Bludau, S., ... & Amunts, 

K. (2017). Two new cytoarchitectonic areas on the human mid -fusiform 

gyrus. Cerebral Cortex , 27 (1), 373 -385. 

Mattout, J., Henson, R. N., & Friston, K. J. (2007). Canonical source reconstruction for 

MEG. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience , 2007 (1), 067613. 

Nolte, G. (2003). The magnetic lead field theorem in the quasi -static approximation and its 

use for magnetoencephalography forward calculation in realistic volume 

conductors. Physics in Medicine & Biology , 48 (22), 3637. 

Overgaard, M., & Sandberg, K. (2021). The Perceptual Awareness Scale —recent 

controversies and debates. Neuroscience of Consciousness , 2021 (1), niab044. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Tononi, G. (2004). An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC 

Neuroscience , 5(1), 42. 

Albantakis, L., Barbosa, L., Findlay, G., Grasso, M., Haun, A. M., Marshall, W., Mayner, W. 

G. P., Zaeemzadeh, A., Boly, M., Juel, B. E., Sasai, S., Fujii, K., David, I., Hendren, 

J., Lang, J. P., & Tononi, G. (2023). Integrated information theory (IIT) 4. 0: 

Formulating the properties of phenomenal existence in physical terms. PLOS 

Computational Biology , 19 (10), e1011465. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1011465 

Bastos, A. M., Vezoli, J., Bosman, C. A., Schoffelen, J. -M., Oostenveld, R., Dowdall, J. R., 

De Weerd, P., Kennedy, H., & Fries, P. (2015). Visual Areas Exert Feedforward and 

Feedback Influences through Distinct Frequency Channels. Neuron , 85 (2), 390 –401. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.018 

Binder, J. R., Desai, R. H., Graves, W. W., & Conant, L. L. (2009). Where Is the Semantic 

System? A Critical Review and Meta -Analysis of 120 Functional Neuroimaging 

Studies. Cerebral Cortex , 19 (12), 2767 –2796. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhp055 

Daunizeau, J., David, O., & Stephan, K. E. (2011). Dynamic causal modelling: A critical 

review of the biophysical and statistical foundations. NeuroImage , 58 (2), 312 –322. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.11.062 

David, O., Kiebel, S. J., Harrison, L. M., Mattout, J., Kilner, J. M., & Friston, K. J. (2006). 

Dynamic causal modeling of evoked responses in EEG and MEG. NeuroImage , 30 (4), 

1255 –1272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.10.045 

Dehaene, S., & Changeux, J. -P. (2005). Ongoing Spontaneous Activity Controls Access to 

Consciousness: A Neuronal Model for Inattentional Blindness. PLOS Biology , 3(5), 

e141. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0030141 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: 

Basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition, The Cognitive Neuroscience 

of Consciousness , 79 (1), 1 –37. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010 -0277(00)00123 -2

Dehaene, S., Sergent, C., & Changeux, J. -P. (2003). A neuronal network model linking 

subjective reports and objective physiological data during conscious perception. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 100 (14), 8520 –8525. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1332574100 

Friston, K. J. (2011). Functional and Effective Connectivity: A Review. Brain Connectivity ,

1(1), 13 –36. https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2011.0008 

Friston, K. J., Bastos, A., Litvak, V., Stephan, K. E., Fries, P., & Moran, R. J. (2012). DCM 

for complex -valued data: Cross -spectra, coherence and phase -delays. NeuroImage, 

Neuroergonomics: The Human Brain in Action and at Work , 59 (1), 439 –455. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.07.048 

Friston, K. J., Harrison, L., & Penny, W. (2003). Dynamic causal modelling. NeuroImage ,

19 (4), 1273 –1302. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053 -8119(03)00202 -7

Garrido, M. I., Kilner, J. M., Kiebel, S. J., & Friston, K. J. (2007). Evoked brain responses are 

generated by feedback loops. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,

104 (52), 20961 –20966. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0706274105 

Hyvarinen, A. (1999). Fast and robust fixed -point algorithms for independent component 

analysis. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 10 (3), 626 –634. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/72.761722 

Jansen, B. H., & Rit, V. G. (1995). Electroencephalogram and visual evoked potential 

generation in a mathematical model of coupled cortical columns. Biological 

Cybernetics , 73 (4), 357 –366. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00199471 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. (1997). The fusiform face area: A module in 

human extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. The Journal of 

Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 17 (11), 4302 –

4311. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.17 -11 -04302.1997 

Kass, R. E., & Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes Factors. Journal of the American Statistical 

Association , 90 (430), 773 –795. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1995.10476572 

Kiebel, S. J., Garrido, M. I., & Friston, K. J. (2007). Dynamic causal modelling of evoked 

responses: The role of intrinsic connections. NeuroImage , 36 (2), 332 –345. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.02.046 

Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., & Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates of consciousness: 

Progress and problems. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 17 (5), Article 5. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.22 

Koch, C., & Tsuchiya, N. (2007). Attention and consciousness: Two distinct brain processes. 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 11 (1), 16 –22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.10.012 

Litvak, V., Mattout, J., Kiebel, S., Phillips, C., Henson, R., Kilner, J., Barnes, G., Oostenveld, 

R., Daunizeau, J., Flandin, G., Penny, W., & Friston, K. (2011). EEG and MEG Data 

Analysis in SPM8. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience , 2011 (1), 852961. 

https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/852961 

Manning, J. R., Jacobs, J., Fried, I., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). Broadband shifts in local field 

potential power spectra are correlated with single -neuron spiking in humans. The 

Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience ,

29 (43), 13613 –13620. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2041 -09.2009 

Mashour, G. A., Roelfsema, P., Changeux, J. -P., & Dehaene, S. (2020). Conscious Processing 

and the Global Neuronal Workspace Hypothesis. Neuron , 105 (5), 776 –798. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.01.026 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Mejias, J. F., Murray, J. D., Kennedy, H., & Wang, X. -J. (2016). Feedforward and feedback 

frequency -dependent interactions in a large -scale laminar network of the primate 

cortex. Science Advances , 2(11), e1601335. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1601335 

Melloni, L. (2022). On keeping our adversaries close, preventing collateral damage, and 

changing our minds. Comment on Clark et al. Journal of Applied Research in Memory 

and Cognition , 11 (1), 45 –49. https://doi.org/10.1037/mac0000009 

Melloni, L., Mudrik, L., Pitts, M., Bendtz, K., Ferrante, O., Gorska, U., Hirschhorn, R., 

Khalaf, A., Kozma, C., Lepauvre, A., Liu, L., Mazumder, D., Richter, D., Zhou, H., 

Blumenfeld, H., Boly, M., Chalmers, D. J., Devore, S., Fallon, F., … Tononi, G. 

(20 23). An adversarial collaboration protocol for testing contrasting predictions of 

global neuronal workspace and integrated information theory. PLOS ONE , 18 (2), 

e0268577. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0268577 

Negro, N. (2024). (Dis)confirming theories of consciousness and their predictions: Towards a 

Lakatosian consciousness science. Neuroscience of Consciousness , 2024 (1), niae012. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niae012 

Peelen, M. V., & Downing, P. E. (2005). Selectivity for the Human Body in the Fusiform 

Gyrus. Journal of Neurophysiology , 93 (1), 603 –608. 

https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00513.2004 

Pitts, M. A., Lutsyshyna, L. A., & Hillyard, S. A. (2018). The relationship between attention 

and consciousness: An expanded taxonomy and implications for ‘no -report’ 

paradigms. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences ,

373 (1755), 20170348. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0348 

Poldrack, R. A., Baker, C. I., Durnez, J., Gorgolewski, K. J., Matthews, P. M., Munafò, M. R., 

Nichols, T. E., Poline, J. -B., Vul, E., & Yarkoni, T. (2017). Scanning the horizon: 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.16.738188 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Towards transparent and reproducible neuroimaging research. Nature Reviews 

Neuroscience , 18 (2), 115 –126. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.167 

Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Daunizeau, J., Moran, R. J., & Friston, K. J. (2009). Bayesian 

model selection for group studies. NeuroImage , 46 (4), 1004 –1017. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.03.025 

Stephan, K. E., Penny, W. D., Moran, R. J., den Ouden, H. E. M., Daunizeau, J., & Friston, K. 

J. (2010). Ten simple rules for dynamic causal modeling. Neuroimage , 49 (4), 3099 –

3109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.11.015 

Taulu, S., & Kajola, M. (2005). Presentation of electromagnetic multichannel data: The signal 

space separation method. Journal of Applied Physics , 97 , 124905 -124905 –124910. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1935742 

Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., & Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information theory: 

From consciousness to its physical substrate. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 17 (7), 

Article 7. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.44 

Tononi, G., & Koch, C. (2015). Consciousness: Here, there and everywhere? Philosophical 

Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 370 (1668), 20140167. 

https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2014.0167 

Weiner, K. S., & Grill -Spector, K. (2012). The improbable simplicity of the fusiform face 

area. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 16 (5), 251 –254. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.03.003 

Weiner, K. S., & Zilles, K. (2016). The anatomical and functional specialization of the 

fusiform gyrus. Neuropsychologia , 83 , 48 –62. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.06.033