Title: Perceptual glimpses are locally accumulated and globally maintained at distinct processing levels

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428v4.full.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 21:29:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 66

Markdown Content:
1

# Perceptual glimpses are locally accumulated and globally 

# maintained at distinct processing levels 

Authors: Elisabeth Parés -Pujolràs 1*, Anna C. Geuzebroek 1, Redmond G. O’Connell 2, Simon 

P. Kelly 1

Affiliations: 

1School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering and UCD Centre for Biomedical Engineering, 

University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland 

2Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience and School of Psychology, Trinity College Dublin, 

Dublin, Ireland 

*Corresponding author 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

Abstract 

Making decisions often requires the integration of multiple pieces of information. An extensive 

body of research has investigated the neural architecture underpinning evidence accumulation 

in perceptual tasks where information is continuously present, but less is known about how this 

neural architecture operates in situations affording only intermittent glimpses of an evidence 

source. In two electroencephalography (EEG) experiments, participants judged the direction of 

up to two pulses of motion evidence se parated by gaps of varying duration. Our behavioural 

analysis found that participants used both pulses but underutilised the second, and showed no 

systematic decrease in accuracy as a function of gap duration. At the neural level, motor beta 

lateralisation tracked cumulative evidence across pulses, maintaining a sustained 

representation of the decision variable through the gap and until response. In contrast, the 

centroparietal positivity (CPP), a previously -characterised signature of evidence accumulation, 

built up transiently to a peak that scaled with each pulse’s contribution to the decision variable 

(i.e. the absolute belief update it produced), falling back to baseline in between pulses. These 

patterns were recapitulated in a model where pulse -informat ion transiently integrated at the 

CPP level is fed to and maintained at a bounded motor level . In this model, the evidence in the 

second pulse is only integrated to the extent that the evidence in the first pulse falls short of the 

bound, or not integrated at all if a bound has already been hit. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

1. Introduction 

Perceptual decision -making is widely thought to involve a process of evidence 

integration over time (Hyafil et al., 2023) . An extensive body of research has successfully 

linked these integration computations to multiple neural decision signals in various species 

(Gold & Shadlen, 2007; Hanks & Summerfield, 2017; Heekeren et al., 2008; O’Connell & 

Kelly, 2021; Shadlen & Kiani, 2013) revealing a neural decision architecture that includes both 

effector -selective motor preparation signals, and motor -independent signals that appear to 

reflect integration operations at an intermediate processing level (Gherman et al., 2024; 

O’Connell & Kelly, 2021; Okazawa & Kiani, 2023; Stockart et al., 2025) . Such neural decision 

processes have mainly been studied in the context of tasks requiring immediate judgements 

about a single continuously -presented stimulus. However, in many real -life situations a 

decision -maker is afforded only a short glimpse of a re levant evidence source and it is uncertain 

whether and when they will receive an additional glimpse, as, for example, when evaluating an 

object among moving traffic that may be intermittently occluded. This scenario has begun to 

be studied using an intermi ttent -evidence task (Kiani et al., 2013) , which we refer to as “gaps 

task”, in which up to two short pulses of noisy evidence for a certain motion direction are 

presented separated by a variable temporal gap, with a behavioural response required after a 

delayed cue. Previous studies using this task or variants of it have found that both evidence 

pulses are utilised, but not fully or equally (Azizi & Ebrahimpour, 2023; Golmohamadian et 

al., 2025; Kiani et al., 2013; Tohidi -Moghaddam et al., 2019) , and although a general 

information leakage account could be ruled out based on the absence of any decline in accuracy 

with gap duration, the neural underpinnings of the task, including the functional roles of 

effector -selective and motor -independent proc esses in handling and maintaining the 

intermittent evidence, and how such information underutilisation can arise, have remained 

unclear. 

In humans, two neurophysiological signatures of decision formation can be utilised 

alongside behavioural data to gain insight into mechanisms underlying perceptual tasks 

(O’Connell & Kelly, 2021) . First, spectral activity in the beta band (13 -30 Hz), long observed 

to decrease over motor cortex with preparation of a contralateral limb (Pfurtscheller & Lopes 

da Silva, 1999; Stancák & Pfurtscheller, 1995) , has been found in decision tasks to build at an 

evidence -dependent rate, reaching a threshold level contralateral to, and coincident with, the 

executed action (Donner et al., 2009; Feuerriegel et al., 2021; Geuzebroek et al., 2023; Kelly 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

et al., 2021; O’Connell et al., 2012; Steinemann et al., 2018) . Motor beta dynamics have also 

been shown to reflect decisions and choice biases in humans (de Lange et al., 2013; Gould et 

al., 2012; Herding et al., 2016; Pape & Siegel, 2016; Urai & Donner, 2022; Wyart et al., 2015) 

and non -human primates (Haegens et al., 2011, 2017; Rassi et al., 2023) , highlighting its role 

as a key marker of decision -related activity. Second, a centroparietal positivity (CPP) in the 

human electroencephalogram (EEG) has been found to exhibit similar evidence -dependent 

buildup dynamics in conventional perceptual tasks with continuous stimuli such as random dot 

motion, but with an earlier latency; it begins building at a stimulus -aligned onset time, rises at 

a rate that scales with evidence strength, and peaks at the time of action choice when immediate 

execution is allowed (Kelly & O’Connell, 2013; O’Connell et al., 2012; Steinemann et al., 

2018) . Signals with similar dynamics have been observed in multiple brain regions including 

the parietal cortex intracranial recordings (Gherman et al., 2024; Pereira et al., 2021; Stockart 

et al., 2025) , bearing some overlap with regions identified in functional imaging studies (Liu 

& Pleskac, 2011; Ploran et al., 2007; Tremel & Wheeler, 2015) . In contrast with motor 

preparation signals, the CPP exhibits evidence -integration dynamics even when no motor 

output is required (O’Connell et al., 2012) . In delayed -response tasks where actions are 

deferred until some time after the perceptual choice is made, the CPP peaks at decision 

commitment and falls back to its baseline level (Azizi & Ebrahimpour, 2023; McCone et al., 

2026; Twomey et al., 2016) , whereas relative motor preparation reflected in motor beta 

lateralisation (MBL) sustains until action execution (Donner et al., 2009; McCone et al., 2026; 

Murphy et al., 2021; Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025; Twomey et al., 2016) . These findings are 

consistent with the CPP tracking an intermediary, motor -independent evidence integration 

process that is continuously fed to downstream motor preparation , where a sustained 

representation of the DV is maintained after commitment is reached, until a response is made .

More recently, a few studies have highlighted that the CPP can behave differently in expanded 

judgement tasks, where evidence is presented as a series of discrete tokens that need to be 

integrated rather than as a continuous, noisy stream. In these tasks, centroparietal signals 

exhibit transient token -evoked positivities that scale with the immediate evidence, rather than 

tracking the evolution of an ongoing decision variable (DV) across tokens (Parés -Pujolràs et 

al., 2025; Wyart et al., 2012, 2015) . Motor Beta Lateralisation (MBL), meanwhile, tracks the 

evolving decision variable across discrete tokens over multiple seconds, by stepping up or 

down according to the evidence in each token and sustaining in between them (Murphy et al., 

2021; Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025; Wilming et al., 2020) . These findings again point to the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

operation of an intermediary decision process reflected in the CPP - one that can be flexibly 

configured to compute different quantities depending on the nature of the task. 

The Gaps task, like expanded judgment tasks, involves temporally disparate pieces of 

information, but it holds key distinctions that demand dedicated investigation. In expanded 

judgement tasks, tokens typically bear little or no perceptual noise, but the o verlap of the 

underlying generative distributions means they often provide conflicting information (e.g. 

Balsdon et al., 2020, 2021; Glickman et al., 2022; Rouault et al., 2022; Waskom & Kiani, 2018; 

Wyart et al., 2015) . The nature of the stimuli thus encourages appraisal of each token as a 

distinct object, potentially explaining the transient pattern of CPP activity. In contrast, the Gaps 

task involves pulses of evidence that are perceptually noisy but always indicate a consistent 

motion direction (Kiani et al., 2013) , thus appearing as glimpses of the same object rather than 

a series of individual objects. Only one study has examined neural signatures of decision 

formation in this intermittent evidence context: using EEG, Azizi & Ebrahimpour (2023) 

showed that the CPP exhibits an evoked positivity after each pulse that appears to decay during 

the gap, suggesting a local processing role. However, how these pulse -evoked activities relate 

to the computations underpinning an ongoing decision, interact with motor preparation to 

determine choice, and relate to any information underutilisation, has not been examined. 

In this study, we recorded EEG during the Gaps task (Kiani et al., 2013) in two 

experiments with slightly different settings for the variable temporal gaps to ensure generality 

of findings. Our primary goal was to characterise the dynamics of the CPP and MBL in the 

context of this intermittent evidence task, and functionally r elate them to behavioural indices 

of integration across tokens. We found that participants based their choices on both pulses but 

with a weaker influence of pulse 2, and coherence -dependent weightings on choice were 

mirrored in the magnitude of transient p ulse -evoked CPPs. These patterns could be explained 

by a decision architecture where the CPP conducts two separate rounds of evidence 

accumulation, continuously feeding the accumulating evidence within each pulse to a

downstream motor process indexed by MBL. MBL in turn tracks a continuous representation 

of the state of the overall DV, sustaining without loss of information throughout the gap and 

between the final evidence and the response. Our behavioural and modelling results indicated 

that participants engaged in a bounded accumulation process, so that evidence samples within 

each pulse were only integrated while the DV encoded in MBL had not yet reached the bound. 

Additionally, given the dynamic structure of the task involving evidence onsets and offsets, we 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

explored the dynamics of attention, as indexed by occipital alpha signals, and these were 

suggestive of a key role in filtering -out of irrelevant dot -motion , and in modulating the weight 

of pulses on choice. 

2. Results 

2.1. Behavioural results 

In this study, participants engaged in a motion direction discrimination task where, on most 

trials, two pulses of partially -coherent dot motion (indicated by yellow dot colour) were 

separated by variable temporal ‘gaps’ in which motion was random, and thu s uninformative 

(indicated by blue dot colour; Fig. 1A ). Though coherence could differ, the direction was 

always consistent between the two pulses, so that they would be construed as two glimpses of 

the same evidence source. Our two experiments (Exp. 1: N = 2 2; Exp. 2: N = 2 1) differed only 

in the delays separating the two pulses. In both experiments, coherence levels were titrated for 

each participant using a staircase procedure aiming for an average 70% accuracy following a 

single evidence pulse. High (Exp. 1: M = 44.73%, SD = 12.64%; Exp 2: M = 33.04%, SD = 

13.41%) and low (Exp. 1: M = 26.75%, SD = 7.74%; Exp 2: M =19.82%, SD = 8.04%) 

coherences were then set to be, respectively, 25% higher and 25% lower than the staircase -

estimated coherence (see Methods ), and small adjustments were made between blocks if 

performance substantially changed ( Figure S1 ). 

As expected, participants’ accuracy scaled with motion coherence and number of pulses. In 

one -pulse trials, participants were more accurate in the high coherence compared to the low 

coherence trials ( Eq. 1 , Exp 1: β1 = 0. 33 ± 0. 05 , p < 0.001; Exp 2: β1 = 0. 43 ± 0. 06, p < 0.001, 

Figure 1A ). There was a further benefit in accuracy from the second pulse when present, 

indicated by sensitivity to coherence in both the first ( Eq.2, Exp 1: β1 = 0. 26 ± 0.0 6, p < 0.001; 

Exp 2: β1 = 0. 31 ± 0.0 5, p < 0.001) and second ( Eq.2, Exp 1: β2 = 0 .1 6 ± 0.0 6, p = 0.001; Exp 

2: β2 = 0. 06 ± 0.0 4, p = 0.01 5) pulses. When both pulses in a two -pulse trial were the same 

coherence, participants performed better compared to one -pulse trials, exhibited both in high 

and low coherence trials in Experiment 2 ( Eq. 3, Exp. 2: β1 = 0. 16 ± 0.0 8, p = 0. 047; β 3 = 0. 02

± 0.0 8, p = 0. 784 ), but only significantly so in high coherence trials in Experiment 1 ( Eq. 3, 

Exp. 1: β1 = 0.2 1 ± 0.0 7, p = 0.0 13 ; β 3 = 0.1 6 ± 0.0 7, p = 0.0 19 ). However, they did not perform 

as well as expected from a perfect accumulator ( Figure 1B ), estimated using performance in 

one -pulse trials to predict expected accuracy in two -pulse ones (see Eq . 5 -7; see Methods ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

The fact that the regression coefficients for the second pulse were smaller than those estimated 

for the first one indicates that participants’ choices were guided more strongly by the first piece 

of evidence they received. On average, accuracies were low est for the most difficult trials (both 

pulses had low motion coherence, LL), intermediate for trials with mixed coherences (LH, HL) 

and highest for the easiest trials (both pulses had high motion coherence, HH). However, we 

also observed a significant pul se -order effect: when the two presented pulses had different 

coherences, participants were more accurate when the first pulse was the high -coherence one 

(HL) compared to trials where the first pulse was low -coherence (LH) in both experiments ( Eq. 

4, Exp 1: β2 = -0.11 ± 0.03, p <0.001; Exp 2: β2 = -0.1 2 ± 0.02, p <0.001; Figure 1B) . This is 

in line with participants’ choices being more strongly influenced by the first evidence pulse. 

Importantly, there was no main effect of gap duration on accuracies ( Eq. 2 , Exp 1: β3 = 0. 06 ±

0.0 8, p = 0. 525 ; Exp 2: β3 = -0.0 03 ± 0.0 5, p =0. 579 ; Figure 1 B), suggesting an absence of 

leakage of information from the first pulse, in line with previous work (Azizi & Ebrahimpour, 

2023; Kiani et al., 2013) . However, in Experiment 2, gap duration interacted with the coherence 

of the second pulse ( Eq 2 , Exp 2: β5 (p2 x gap interaction) = 0.16 ± 0.07, p = 0.031). Since this 

effect was inconsistent across experiments and we did not have prior hypotheses about it, we 

leave it to one side and focus on the main effects of coherence. In what follows, we combine 

EEG and computational modelling to test the possibility that the greater sensitivity to the first 

pulse arises from the participants engaging in a bounded accumulation process where decisions 

are sometimes terminated early, cur tailing the extent to which the second pulse benefits 

accuracy and driving the coherence order effects. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Figure 1. Task and behavioural results. A. Experimental structure. Participants viewed a 

random dot stimulus that coherently moved either to the left or right during yellow evidence 

pulses, of which there was sometimes one, but usually two, separated by a variable gap in 

evidence indicated by blu e dot colour. B. Grand -averaged (mean ± SEM) accuracy in two -

pulse trials, sorted by pulse coherence (low, L/ high, H), order (LL, LH, HL, HH) and gap 

duration. Data points in the left -hand section indicate single -pulse accuracies. Overlaid 

horizontal dashed lines indicate the expected accuracy of a perfect accumulator, based on the 

grand -average performance on one -pulse trials. Note that a perfect accumulator predicts 

identical accuracies for the HL and LH conditions, and therefore the two lines overlap. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

2.2.EEG results 

2.2.1. Activity during the gap 

We then turned to neural correlates of evidence accumulation during the task, specifically, 

MBL and the CPP. Across the two experiments and in all gap conditions, MBL showed 

evidence -dependent buildup continuously through the sequence of pulses with a temp oral lag 

(Fig. 2A ), sustaining at a coherence -dependent level (see Fig. S2; S3 ) throughout the gap 

between the two pulses and until response , showing stronger lateralisation towards the correct 

response following high -coherence pulses . In contrast, the CPP exhibited a transient build -up 

following each evidence pulse, falling back to baseline levels prior to the second pulse ( Fig. 

2B). 

Given that our task included strong external (colour) cues indicating time windows with and 

without evidence, we further investigated the dynamics of attentional engagement with the 

stimulus, as indexed by occipital alpha activity (Foxe & Snyder, 2011; Van Diepen et al., 2019) ,

throughout trial time. In both experiments, we observed strong occipital alpha 

desynchronisation (i.e. a decrease relative to baseline) during the periods in which the CPP 

indicated active evaluation of the yellow -dot evidence periods ( Fig. 2C ), and strongly elevated 

alpha above baseline levels in between those pulse -processing periods. Adding to the above 

behavioural finding of no main effect of gap duration, this suggests that the participants 

successfully gated stimulus evaluation according to dot colour, selectively attending to the 

temporal windows in which decision -relevant information is available for evaluation, and 

ignoring the decision -irrelevant gap periods. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

Figure 2. Neural correlates of evidence accumulation and motor preparation across 

temporal gaps. A. Grand -averaged (±SEM) motor beta lateralisation (MBL) [Contra -

Ipsilateral hemispheres with respect to correct response hand], sorted by accuracy ( solid line 

correct, dashed line error). Participants started preparing a motor response in response to the 

first pulse, and MBL was sustained throughout the gap and until the time of behavioural 

response across all gap conditions in both experiments. B. Grand -averaged (±SEM) 

centroparietal positivity (CPP) across all temporal gap conditions. The CPP showed transient 

evoked responses following each pulse. Note that the evoked amplitudes by P1 (CPP -P1) were 

systematically higher than those evoked by P2 (CP P-P2) (Exp. 1: CPP -P2 = 5 2% of CPP -P1 

peak amplitude; Exp. 2: CPP -P2 = 5 8% of CPP -P1 peak amplitude; see also Fig. S 8). C. Grand -

averaged (±SEM) occipital alpha power for each of the gap conditions, baseline -corrected 

before the onset of the first pulse and collapsed across coherence. Occipital alpha power 

showed a steep decrease following pulse onset (which was clearly indica ted by a change in the 

colour of the moving dots), and steep increase overshooting the baseline level once the dots 

changed colour again to indicate non -coherent motion . Note that for both motor beta and alpha, 

greater negative values reflect greater preparation of the correct response and attention, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

respectively. In all panels, shaded areas indicate the timing of evidence pulses for the various 

gap durations, which are colour coded (see top axis). Topographies illustrate MBL before 

response (right minus left responses, A) in correct trials, and CPP/alpha power 550 ms post 

stimulus onset ( dashed line, B,C ). Further, markers along the bottom indicate times where the 

signal significantly differed from zero (two -tailed cluster -based permutation test, p<0.005) in 

only correct trials for MBL for consistency of polarity ( A), and for all trials pooled in the case 

of the CPP ( B) and alpha ( C). Note that evidence -dependent buildup dynamics are clearly 

delayed in MBL relative to the CPP, and this aligns with previous research supporting the 

contention that the CPP lies upstream from motor preparation (Steinemann et al. 2018); such 

time delays w ere not a focus of the present study because in such delayed -response conditions 

we do not have access to the time of decision commitment. 

2.2.2. Centroparietal signals transiently reflect local accumulation of evidence in each 

pulse 

Next, we examined coherence -dependent CPP dynamics during the pulses . The CPP 

evoked after the first pulse (CPP -P1) scaled with the strength of evidence as expected, building 

more steeply (Exp. 1: t (21) = 2.18, p = 0.04; Exp. 2: t (20) = 3.48, p = 0.002) and reaching higher 

amplitudes after high coherence pulses compared to low -coherence ones over a cluster of 

centroparietal electrodes (Exp. 1: p = 0.009, Exp. 2: p = 0.031; two -tailed cluster -based 

permutation test ; Fig. 3A -D). Furthermore, single -trial variability in CPP -P1 amplitude 

significantly modulated the first pulse’s weight on choice: in trials where evoked CPP -P1 

amplitudes were particularly high, the coherence of pulse 1 had a stronger influence on 

behaviour ( Fig. S11A ). 

The coherence of the second pulse modulated peak amplitude in the standard way, with larger 

CPP amplitudes in trials with high pulse 2 coherence, although this effect was only significant 

in Experiment 2 (Exp. 1: p = 0.165 , Exp.2: p = 0.00 9; two -tailed cluster -based permutation 

test; Fig. 3F,H;) . CPP -P2 amplitude was also influenced by the coherence of Pulse 1: on trials 

where the first pulse was low coherence, CPPs evoked by the second pulse reached higher 

amplitudes (Exp. 1: p = 0.0 18 , Exp. 2: p = 0.00 5; two -tailed cluster -based permutation test; 

see Fig. 3F,H ). Additionally, CPP -P2 amplitude was generally smaller than CPP -P1 amplitude, 

which was the case whether we computed CPP -P2 amplitudes after baseline -correction before 

pulse 2 onset (Exp. 1: t(21) = 2. 29 , p = 0.0 32; Exp. 2: t(20) = 4.1 9, p < 0.001) or after correction 

for CPP -P1 overlap ( Exp. 1: t(21) = 1.93 , p = 0.0 67 ; Exp. 2: t(20) = 3. 25 , p = 0.00 3; see 

Methods for details ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Figure 3. CPP amplitude following each pulse scales with its coherence, and the strength 

of evidence in pulse 1 additionally inversely modulates amplitudes following pulse 2. A,C. 

Grand -averaged (±SEM) centroparietal activity after pulse 1 (CPP -P1), averaged across all gap 

conditions. B,D. Standardized regression coefficients illustrating the effect of P1 ( solid line )

and P2 ( dashed line ) coherence on evoked CPP -P1 amplitudes. Inset topographies illustrate the 

coherence effect [P1 high – P1 low] at [0.4 -0.6s] after P1. E,G. Grand -averaged (±SEM) 

centroparietal activity after pulse 2 (CPP -P2), averaged over all non -zero gaps in the two 

experiments. For illustration purposes, we subtracted the average activity of long gap trials 

with the same P1 coherence from the epoched EEG traces, between [ -0.2 to 1.4s] from P1 

presentation, and baseline corrected traces [ -100 to 0ms] before P2. This isolates the neural 

activity uniquely associated with the presentation of the second pulse in short gap trials (<1s), 

where potentials evo ked by the first and second pulses overlapped, by removing the activity 

associated with the first pulse from the P2 -evoked traces, including baseline trends (see Fig. 

S4 ). The qualitative patterns did not vary if this correction was not applied ( see Fig S5 ). Note 

also the difference in the y axis scale compared to panels A,C. F,H. Standardized regression 

coefficients (mean ±SEM) illustrating the effect of P1 ( solid line ) and P2 ( dashed line )

coherence on evoked CPP -P2 amplitudes. Inset topographies illustrate the difference between 

[P1 high – P1 low], solid outline; [P2 high – P2 low], dashed outline) [0.4 -0.6s] after P2. The 

negative effect of P1 illustrates higher amplitudes for P1 -low tr ials. *Markers along the bottom 

of panels B,D,F and H indicate significant clusters where coherence effects differed from zero 

(two -tailed cluster -based permutation test, p<0.05). Shaded areas indicate the tested time 

window. See Fig. S3 for full -trial ERP traces, sorted by gap and coherence conditions. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

2.2.4. A single bounded decision process can account for key behavioural and neural 

patterns 

We then aimed to identify a computational model that could account for the key 

behavioural accuracy and CPP amplitude effects observed in our data. Similar to previous 

studies (Azizi & Ebrahimpour, 2023; Kiani et al., 2013; Tohidi -Moghaddam et al., 2019) there 

was no evidence of leak in our data, given that no general decrease in accuracy was observed 

for longer gap durations. Th is lack of a main effect of gap duration on accuracies also indicates 

that participants did not accumulate the incoherent motion presented during the gaps. Instead, 

the primacy effect observed in our behavioural results, with higher accuracies in HL than LH 

trials, is consistent with a bounded process where participants sometimes terminated evidence 

accumulation early, failing to use all available evidence. Thus, we fitted a single bounded 

accumulator model with three free parameters (bound, high - and low -coh erence drift rates), 

where evidence accumulation without leak proceed s only during the pulse time windows and 

is terminated upon bound crossing (see Methods for full details). The overall DV was sustained 

at the value attained at the end of pulse 1 throughout the gap. If the bound was not crossed by 

the end of the trial, the sign of the DV at the end of the trial determined the model’s predicted 

choice. 

This simple single -DV model could account for the order effects observed in 

behavioural data, where the first pulse had a greater bearing on choice than the second one, 

while at the same time capturing the generally greater accuracy of two -pulse trials com pared 

to single -pulse ones ( Fig. 4A ). In this model, this partial benefit of the second pulse arises from 

the fact that the DV is further influenced by it only on the trials where the DV has not already 

reached a bound. The second pulse can thus be integrated to varying extents along a continuum: 

not at all (if a bound is hit during pulse 1), partially (if no bound was hit during pulse 1, and 

only until a bound is hit during pulse 2), or fully (if no bound is hit at any p oint during the 

trial). As expected, a greater proportion of trials terminate early in the P1 -high trials compared 

to P1 -low trials ( Fig. 4B ). Note that this simple diffusion model has no way to produce 

systematic gap -dependent effects, meaning that predicted accuracies are forced to be flat across 

gap durations ; again, since the observed gap -dependent effects were unexpected and differed 

in our two experiments, we did not pursue further modelling approaches to attempt to capture 

them in the current study (but see Fig. S9, S10 and S11 for exploratory analyses on how 

temporal expectations might influence integration processes and evidence weighting). We did 

explore alternative flexible weighting models in which the underutilisation of P2 occurred as a 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

direct effect of dampening the evidence therein as opposed to indirectly through the application 

of the bound. While these could explain the observed primacy effects, the simple bounded 

model with no drift rate re -weighting provided the best fit to the cur rent data when accounting 

for parsimony according to Bayes Information Criterion (see Supplementary Note 1 for an 

extended discussion). 

Figure 4. Simulated behavioural data (N = 50000) of a simple bounded accumulator model 

with three parameters (B (bound), d1 ( low drift rate), d2 ( high drift rate)), fit to all grand -

averaged data points for each experiment separately (see Fig. S1 3 & Fig. S1 4 for results based 

on single -participant fits) . A. Grand -averaged simulated ( solid lines ) accuracy in single - (left )

and two -pulse ( right ) trials, sorted by pulse coherence and gap duration in experiments 1 ( top )

and 2 (bottom ). Observed data are overlaid (dashed ) for comparison. Simulated data 

recapitulated the observed order effects. For simplicity, the model was not endowed with any 

means to account for effects of gap duration. B. Proportion of simulated two -pulse trials that 

hit a bound during the first pulse, and therefore did not use the second pulse evidence to make 

a choice. C. Absolute value of the decision variable (DV) at the end of pulse 1 in the subset of 

trials where the bound was not hit during that pulse, sorted by condition. 

Then, we simulated , from this diffusion model fit to accuracy data, the neural activity 

corresponding to MBL and the CPP ( Fig. 5 ). Our empirical results suggested that motor 

preparation as indexed by MBL tracks the state of the bounded decision variable in a sustained 

manner, emerging shortly after the first pulse and remaining lateralised until response. Thus, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

we simulated MBL by taking the signed values of the model -derived DV throughout the trial 

and averaging across trials. These exhibited a similar pattern to the empirical data, with the 

signed DV showing opposite -sign patterns for error vs. correct trials ( Fig. 5A,D , top; cf. Fig. 

2A ). If a bound was hit, the DV was set to stay stable in our model, and therefore recapitulated 

the way in which motor preparation responses here ( Fig 2A ) and in previous studies (e.g. 

(Donner et al., 2009; Murphy et al., 2021; Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025; Twomey et al., 2016) 

sustain until response execution. Note that, in our simulations ( Fig. 5A,D ), the average traces 

do not always reach the estimated bound: this is because, in a fraction of trials, the bound was 

never hit, bringing averaged values away from the bound value. 

In turn, our results suggested that the transient CPP activity reflected local, pulse -driven 

accumulation fed to the DV while evidence was present. This accumulation process stopped 

during incoherent random dot intervals, leading to the signal falling down rather than 

maintaining the global DV state. Thus, we simulated CPP activity by taking the absolute values 

of the cumulative evidence gathered within each pulse (|ΔDV|) on single trials (in keeping with 

the always -positive nature of the CPP; see Afacan -Seref et al., 2018; Kelly et al., 2021) and 

averaging across trials. If a bound was hit by the overall DV, the CPP traces were set to return 

linearly to 0 within 200 ms, as empirically observed in action -locked traces in self -paced tasks 

(e.g. Steinemann et al., 2018) , and it did not resume upon presentation of a second pulse. This 

fall -down is only a signal feature accompanying the deactivation of the intermediary 

integration process and does not bear on choice. Given that the CPP traces in our grand -

averaged data ( Fig. 2B ) fell fully back to baseline by the end of the longer gaps, CPP traces 

were also assumed to linearly return to zero as soon as the dots turned blue at the end of 

evidence pulses if a bound had not been hit by that time . Such a pattern assumes that the CPP 

generators are active during periods where evidence is presented (yellow dot pulses), but 

become inactive and fall down to baseline once evidence stops (blue dot periods). During pulse 

processing, the CPP feeds its output to the downstream motor level, which sustains its current 

level during the gap rather than deactivating. In this way, the motor process continuously 

represents the overal l DV throughout the trial: the evidence that had been integrated by the 

CPP during pulse 1 (ΔDV_P1) is maintained at the motor level through the gap, is potentially 

updated by another round of accumulation by the CPP during pulse 2 provided the bound was 

not already reached, and thereafter further sustains up until response execution. Given the 

absence of previous empirical data on how signals may fall down without having hit a bound, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

we assumed the same fall -down rate in this case as when a bound is hit (linear return to zero 

within 200 ms). 

The simulated single -pulse accumulation traces from our model captured the sensitivity of both 

CPP -P1 and CPP -P2 to motion coherence. The difference in CPP -P1 slopes for high vs. low 

coherence pulses is simply explained by the high vs. low drift -rate assoc iated with these 

conditions ( Fig. 5B,E ). In the more complex case of CPP -P2, the activity evoked by P2 reached 

higher amplitudes in trials where P1 was low coherence ( Fig. 5C,F ). Our model can account 

for this due to two effects: First, because P1 -Low trials are less likely to terminate early ( Fig. 

4B ), and therefore fewer trials take a value of zero during P2. Second, because among those 

trials that do not terminate early, the level reached by the DV by the end of pulse one (ΔDV_P1) 

is on average lower for low - than high -coherence ( Fig 4C; Fig 5B,E ), and therefore more 

evidence from P2 needs to be integrated before the bound is hit and accumulation terminated. 

Thus, the higher CPP -P2 amplitudes reached in trials with low P1 coherence reflected both a 

higher proportion of trials where participants en gaged in accumulation of P2, and the fact that 

they had to cover a longer distance to reach the bound (i.e. larger changes in the DV (|ΔDV_P2|) 

were possible before a bound was hit). 

The model also predicted differences in CPP amplitude in correct/incorrect trials, which our 

dataset broadly recapitulated ( Fig. S6 ). In particular, it predicted stronger CPP -P1 coherence -

dependent effects in correct vs. incorrect trials, and it also predicted an interaction between 

accuracy and P2 -coherence on CPP -P2 amplitude in trials with mixed coherences (HL, LH). 

Finally, we assessed the extent to which some of our models’ assumptions influenced 

the simulated CPP profile. For example, we assumed for parsimony that the CPP would 

deactivate with the same temporal dynamics when a decision process terminates because a 

bound has been hit, as when accumulation is reset at the start of the gap, but we do not know 

this to be the case. In fact, our simulations show the CPP falling down rapidly to baseline in all 

gap conditions, while empirical data show th e CPP reaching all the way to baseline for the 

longest gap condition only. We therefore conducted additional simulations to illustrate how 

different assumptions about the fall -down duration (i.e. time to go back to 0) and delay -to -fall 

(i.e. the amount of time elapsed before the signal stops accumulating and starts going down) 

would affect the CPP’s profile during the gap in our two experiments ( Fig. S7 ). These 

parameters affected the CPP shape during the gap, but the patterns of coherence -dependent 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

CPP -P1 and CPP -P2 amplitudes remained unchanged. Longer fall -down durations better 

recapitulate the observed empirical fall -down in short gap conditions, where signals fail to 

reach baseline before the second pulse onset. These simulations suggest that our assumption of 

a 200ms fall -down time may have underestimated that of the true signal dynamics, but 

dedicated experiments will be required to precisely quantify the fall -down characteristics of 

the CPP in these scenarios. In turn, allowing for some post -decisional evidence accumulation 

before the signal starts falling down also better captures some features of our empirical data, 

such as the higher amplitudes and longer peak la tencies observed in the zero gap condition ( Fig 

S7 ). We also simulated an alternative scenario where the signal is not assumed to fall (Fig. S8 ), 

which would be predicted if the CPP’s neural generators remained active throughout the gap, 

encoding a sustained representation of the DV, so long as the bound has not been crossed. 

These simulations did not recapitulate the CPP’s full drop to baseline in the long gap 

conditions, and produced distinctly smaller CPP -P2 evoked potentials relative to CPP -P1 (Exp. 

1: CPP -P2 = 19% of CPP -P1 amplitude; Exp. 2: CPP -P2 = 13% of CPP -P1 amplitude) than 

observed in the empirical data (see Fig. 2B ), which were more closely approximated by the 

model assuming a full reset during the gap (Exp. 1: CPP -P2 = 53% of CPP -P1 amplitude; Exp. 

2: CPP -P2 = 35% of CPP -P1 amplitude; see Methods for full details on this analysis). Thus, 

the data are more consistent with a full reset of the intermediate accumulation process reflected 

in the CPP at the end of the pulse containing informative evidence, regardless of it having 

crossed a bound, with th e maintenance of intermediate, potentially subthreshold levels of the 

overall DV being encoded solely at the downstream level of motor preparation. 

Only one of the alternative flexible weighting models we considered could explain both 

the behavioural and neural patterns of data we observed - a model where the second pulse is 

downweighted as an inverse function of the strength of the first pulse. However, this model 

was not favoured by the model comparison approach (see Supplementary Note 1). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

Figure 5. Model -derived simulations of motor beta lateralisation (MBL) , reflecting the 

overall ‘DV’, and centroparietal positivity (CPP) , reflecting local pulse accumulation 

(|ΔDV| ) recapitulate empirical data. A,D. Simulated average MBL ( top ) and CPP ( bottom )

traces over the whole trial, sorted by gap duration. MBL traces are additionally sorted by 

accuracy (solid line = correct; dashed lines = error). The simulations recapitulate the bimodal 

shape of the CPP across the whole trial, with the second pulse reachi ng lower amplitudes than 

the 1st one in both experiments (see Fig. 2B ). In turn, by assuming that MBL signals track the 

state of the DV throughout the trial and because no leak or decay is assumed, our simulations 

could also recapitulate the sustained nature of motor lateralisation signals throughout the gap. 

Note that DVs were simulated so that positive signs are associated with correct choices, and 

negative signs to errors (hence the y -axis inversion to accord with empirical MBL signals) .

Dotted red lines indicate the bounds for error/correct trials, respectively. B,E. Simulated MBL -

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

P1 (top) and CPP -P1 (bottom), sorted by P1 coherence, and averaged across all gap durations 

and accuracies. Note that the step -like changes in MBL traces are due to averaging the DV 

values over the various gap durations. No such effect is observed in simul ated CPP potentials 

because traces are derived from P1 activity exclusively. C,F. Simulated MBL -P2 (top) and 

CPP -P2 (bottom) , sorted by P1 and P2 coherence, and averaged across all gap durations and 

accuracies. Our simulations recapitulate the observed coherence effects at both CPP -P1 (see 

Fig. 3A,C ) and CPP -P2 (see Fig. 3E,G ). Note that, for CPP simulations, we plot the estimated 

build -up at P2 assuming that activity started at 0 and not considering any potential overlap from 

post -P1 fall -down earlier on in the simulated trial, for consistency with the empirical traces 

where CPP -P1 activity is removed from the P2 -evoked traces. In contrast, the MBL -P2 traces 

continue from their post -P1 state, accounting for the sustained nature of the signal (see Fig. 

S2,S3 for empirical MBL -P1/P2 traces). Note also that, for the sake of simplicity, our CPP 

simulations do not assume any delay between stimulus presentation and signal build up. 

Therefore, our simulated CPPs start building up immediately after pulse onset, while empirical 

ones start with approximately a 0.2s delay. Similarly, although motor preparation signals lag 

the motor independent buildup dynamics at the CPP level, we assumed instant transmission 

here for simplicity. Since only accuracy and not reaction time was to be captured in the 

modelling of this delayed -response task, it was not necessary to estimate transmission delays. 

3. Discussion 

A wealth of studies has investigated the neural mechanisms underpinning evidence 

accumulation in tasks where information is continuously available, identifying multiple neural 

decision signals at various levels in the sensorimotor hierarchy (Gold & Shadlen, 2007; 

Heekeren et al., 2008; O’Connell & Kelly, 2021; Okazawa & Kiani, 2023) . However, little is 

known about the mechanisms underpinning decision -making in contexts where evidence from 

a given source comes in temporally separate bouts. This is important not only because many 

real -life decisions require this kind of integration, but also because neural decision signals can 

exhibit functional dissociations when probed in more complex contexts (Okazawa & Kiani, 

2023; Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025) . In this study, we asked: how do neural decision signals 

support evidence accumulation if information availability is paused for a variable amount of 

time? Focussing on two human EEG decision signals, the centroparietal positivity (CPP) and 

motor beta lat eralisation (MBL), we show that they reflect processes with distinct roles during 

decision formation in this context. Across two experiments, we show that the CPP does not 

exhibit sustained activity during the gap between evidence pulses, but exhibits tran sient build, 

peak and fall dynamics in response to each pulse that track distinct rounds of evidence 

accumulation, and reflect the absolute contribution of each pulse to the overall decision variable 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

(|ΔDV|). In contrast, MBL exhibited build -up during pulses and sustained activity during the 

gap between, consistent with the encoding of a signed DV evolving across pulses. Our 

behavioural and neural data can be explained by a simple bounded accumulation process, where 

participants sometimes terminate decisions early despite a cost in accuracy. 

Our finding that the CPP exhibits transient activations tracking multiple rounds of evidence 

accumulation that feed into a single decision provides further insight into its functional role. 

Most previous studies using continuous evidence paradigms showed t hat the CPP steadily 

grows throughout an evidence accumulation process, in parallel with motor preparation, 

consistent with its reflecting the absolute value of an underlying, continuously -accumulating 

DV (Kelly & O’Connell, 2013; O’Connell et al., 2012; Steinemann et al., 2018) . In contrast, 

in our task the CPP exhibits two distinct build -up processes that align with the two pulses 

presented in each trial. This suggests that the CPP builds up while accumulation is ongoing, 

and disengages when the accumulation process is paused or a bound is hit. This interpretation 

of our data was further supported by simulations of the CPP profile under various signal decay 

assumptions, which showed that empirical signals were better recapitulated by a process that 

assumes that the CPP s igna l falls down toward baseline when evidence is paused ( Fig S 8). 

Furthermore, we observed that the amplitude of each pulse -evoked CPP reflected the weight 

of that pulse on choice. At the grand average level, the initial pulse systematically evoked 

higher amplitudes than the second one, consistent with its greater inf luence on choice behaviour 

(Fig. 2B ). Further, single -trial regressions confirmed that fluctuations in CPP -P1 amplitude for 

a given coherence level were linked to behavioural variability, with higher -than -average CPPs 

associated with a stronger weighting of the first pulse on choice (Fig S11). Put together, these 

results are suggestive of a direct link between the CPP amplitude following a particular 

stimulus and that stimulus’ weight on choice. Empirical observations from previous studies 

align with this interpretation. In a previous study usin g the same gaps task (Azizi & 

Ebrahimpour, 2023) , it was the second pulse that had a stronger weight on choice rather than 

the first (discussed below), and we note that CPP amplitudes were accordingly larger for pulse 

2. Thus, although the direction of the behavioural bias differed across studies, in bo th, the bias 

in CPP amplitudes was in the same direction as the behavioural bias. 

Our results support the idea that the CPPs following sequential pulses capture multiple 

rounds of evidence accumulation that are part of a single decision, and that its amplitude 

reflects each pulse’s partial contribution to an evolving DV. In contrast to the transient pattern 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

of activity that characterises the CPP in our task, MBL started shortly after the first pulse, and 

was sustained at a coherence dependent level throughout the whole trial duration ( Fig 2 & Fig 

S2 ). This is in line with multiple previous studies, which have identified sustained encoding of 

decision variables in motor preparatory signals (Donner et al., 2009; Murphy et al., 2016, 2021; 

Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025; Wyart et al., 2015) . Put together, our findings support the idea that 

in this task the CPP feeds to accruing evidence from each individual glimpse of evidence 

(|ΔDV|) to downstream motor signals that maintain a sustained representation of the evolving 

DV. Thus, our study identifies new task -dependent functional dissociations between distinct 

levels of the neural architecture underpinning decision making. 

The dynamics within these levels and interactions between them were further 

illuminated by our computational models. In our two experiments, both the behavioural and 

neural effects could be reproduced with a two -level bounded accumulation model, in which a n

intermediate accumulator operates locally on contiguous periods of evidence, feeding its output 

on to a thresholded motor level where the cumulative total is sustained. Our model assumed 

that participants stop accumulating evidence if a bound is hit and that accumulation is paused 

during the gap between pulses; while the cumulative total is held at the motor level, the 

intermediate accumulator resets. By assuming that the CPP becomes inactive and falls down 

during the gaps, our simulations could recapitulate key CPP characteristics observed in our task 

including the opposite effects of the first and second pulse coheren ce on its amplitude. The fact 

that trials with low coherence first pulses were less likely to be terminated early, and had to 

cover a longer distance -to -bound upon presentation of the second pulse explained why CPP -

P2 reached higher amplitudes in those tri als. 

A key feature of our model which enabled it to account for our behavioural observations 

was that accumulation was bounded, so that decisions could be terminated before all of the 

evidence has been sampled and accumulated. Given that the motion in any two s equential 

pulses in the gaps task always went in the same direction, that behavioural responses were 

deferred until a later cue, and that single -pulse accuracies were far from ceiling, the optimal 

strategy would have been to perfectly accumulate all availa ble evidence; by setting a bound, 

our participants often missed some information and thus achieved suboptimal accuracy. While 

behaviour approximating perfect integration in relatively long timescales has been reported 

across species (Brunton et al., 2013; Waskom & Kiani, 2018) , suboptimal integration has also 

been frequently observed . Previous expanded judgement tasks prescribing perfect integration 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

have often reported recency biases (Cheadle et al., 2014; Wyart et al., 2015) , but primacy 

effects consistent with early decision terminations have also been observed in both humans 

(Balsdon et al., 2020) and non -human primates (Kiani et al., 2008; Mazurek et al., 2003; Yates 

et al., 2017) . Some studies have even found “bump -shaped” psychophysical kernels indicating 

increased weighting of evidence occurring around the middle of a stimulus sequence (Keung 

et al., 2019, 2020; Sospedra et al., 2025) . Such deviations from optimal integration may reduce 

cognitive effort at the cost of accuracy, and may emerge due to multiple factors, including 

stimulus properties (Bronfman et al., 2016; Lange et al., 2021) , biases driven by stimulus 

consistency (Cheadle et al., 2014; Glickman et al., 2022) or choice history (Urai et al., 2019) ,

or result from different integration strategies that may be flexibly deployed, such as leaky 

(Tsetsos et al., 2012) or bounded accumulation (Kiani et al., 2008; Mazurek et al., 2003) .

In the context of our task, previous studies using the same stimuli found the opposite 

bias in behavioural weighting, where the second pulse had a stronger influence on choice than 

the first (Azizi & Ebrahimpour, 2023; Kiani et al., 2013) . Given that the stimulus characteristics 

(dot speed, density) in previous work were the same as in our study, differences in trial 

structure, difficulties and training may account for this discrepancy instead. For example, our 

task had comparatively long lead -in periods before the first pulse (min. 0.7s compared to min. 

0.4s of previous studies), which may have helped them to prepare for full integration of the 

first pulse. In addition, while previous studies included at least four coherence levels, we used 

only 2, which possibly lends itself to calibrating a bound to achieve acceptable accuracy while 

saving cognitive effort. Furthermore, we did not use trial -by -trial feedback but rather provided 

aggregate performance metrics at the end of each block, which would ha ve detracted from 

participants’ ability to monitor their own performance. Finally, even though the probability of 

a single pulse trial was the same, the single -pulse staircasing procedure we used at the 

beginning of the task may have encouraged a strategy more focused on the information in the 

first pulse. In line with this interpretation, a recent study that also lacked trial by trial feedback 

and used a single -pulse training procedure has also reported recency effects in a task with 

different visual stimu li but the same variable -delay task structure (Golmohamadian et al., 

2025) . However, resolving the factors that encourage early termination strategies will 

ultimately require dedicated experimental manipulations. 

Our findings regarding the CPP’s contribution to decisions based on temporally 

separate bouts of evidence aligns with the results of recent work in expanded judgement tasks 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

(Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025; Wyart et al., 2012, 2015) . In expanded judgement studies, 

participants view a sequence of discrete, easily -identified tokens that support one of two 

choices and must integrate over multiple tokens to make an accurate decision. In these tasks, 

CPP responses to discrete tokens have been shown to scale with context -optimal belief updates 

in classic non -volatile contexts that prescribe perfect linear accumulation (Wyart et al., 2012, 

2015) as well as in volatile environments where the correct answer may change within a given 

trial, which prescribe a nonlinear transformation of the token information being integrated 

(Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025) . That is, evoked CPP activities track how much a DV changed 

following each piece of evidence, but not the absolute running sum of accumulated evidence. 

This stands in contrast to the results from conventional decision -making tasks where evidence 

is presen ted continuously, and in the form of high -noise continuous stimuli (Geuzebroek et al., 

2023; Gherman et al., 2024; O’Connell et al., 2012; Steinemann et al., 2018) rather than low -

noise discrete tokens. Our task represents a middle ground between these two types of 

paradigms: we used noisy continuous evidence, but grouped it in two temporally discrete, 

sequential windows. Thus, participants needed to integrate over time to discriminate the 

information in each evidence pulse, but also across evidence pulses to maximise their accuracy. 

This allowed us to show that, in conditions where evidence is noisy and continuous but can be 

paused, the CPP’s profile separately trac ks multiple rounds of evidence accumulation. When 

such updates occur in discrete steps as in expanded judgement tasks, or in short dynamically -

accruing bouts as in our gaps task, the CPP does not seem to keep track of the state of an overall 

DV between temporally separated pieces of evidence , but rather processes each piece 

separately . However, it remains unclear to what extent the CPP may behave differently in other 

contexts. In particular, a common feature between expanded judgement tasks and our design is 

that the presence of evidence is unambiguously indicated, in our case by colou r cues. These 

colour cues may have acted to trigger initiation and termination of two rounds of evidence 

accumulation. However, it is plausible that in the absence of such external cues the CPP may 

have exhibited a sustained pattern of activity consistent with continuous monitoring of the 

environment (Geuzebroek et al., 2023) , potentially plateauing during periods with incoherent 

dot motion that should elicit close -to -zero, or heavily reduced, momentary belief updates on 

average. This will require a dedicated experiment to test. 

Our study also leaves some open questions. Given that the coherence -dependent effects 

of gap duration on behaviour were not expected and were inconsistent across the two 

experiments ( Fig 1B ), we did not aim to capture them in our modelling. However, surmising 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

that they might relate to dynamic expectations arising from the temporal structure of the task, 

we sought to gain insight into dynamics of attentional engagement and expectation through 

exploratory analyses of occipital alpha activity ( Fig 2C, Fig S9 ). Occipital Alpha -band power 

has been linked to attention and temporal expectations (Rohenkohl & Nobre, 2011) , and also 

to the onset (Van Den Brink et al., 2021) and build -up rate (Kelly & O’Connell, 2013) of 

evidence accumulation signals like the CPP. In our two experiments, the gap durations between 

the two pulses followed different distributions: in Exp 1 gaps were uniformly distributed, 

whereas in Exp 2 they were skewed towards shorter gaps durations. W e found evidence that 

occipital alpha power was sensitive to this difference ( Fig S9 ), in that it was relatively reduced 

during the longer gaps in Exp 1, where they were relatively more likely, compared to Exp 2. 

We also found that phasic alpha decreases additionally modulated the weight of the second 

pulse on behaviour in Exp 2 ( Fig S11 ), suggesting that phasic alpha activations may influence 

evidence integration. However, more work is required to specifically test how tonic and phasic 

occipital Alpha may interact with evidence accumulation processes, or influence behaviour 

through other mechanisms. 

While the bounded model provides an intuitive account of the push -pull relationship 

whereby the more evidence is used from P1, the less is used from P2, it was important to 

explore alternative models based on the idea that the evidence itself is unequally weighted 

across the two pulses. Previous studies where sequential samples may either be consistent or 

inconsistent with an evolving decision variable (Cheadle et al., 2014; Glickman et al., 2022; 

Park et al., 2025) have reported consistency biases, where evidence supporting current beliefs 

is boosted rather than dampened. In all these studies, the opposite alternative to that which 

gained early support is selectively downweighted . However, in our task the two pulses always 

favoured the same alternative, so that no inconsistent evidence was ever presented. Thus, it is 

plausible that participants may have partially withdrawn attention from the task following the 

first pulse, and esp ecially so if evidence was strong. Based on this idea, we devised an 

unbounded model in which P2 drift rate is downscaled as a function of the coherence of P1. 

This could account for both behavioural and neural results, producing a primacy effect and a 

pattern of CPP -P2 amplitudes that recapitulated the observ ed pattern (see Supplementary Note 

1). While this model was not supported by quantitative model comparison (Fig. S1 5), and it 

does not change the key finding that CP P-P2 amplitude mirrored its contribution to choice, the 

fact that it could at least capture the key patterns qualitatively calls for discussion of its 

plausibility. In the bounded model, the integration of the second pulse is curtailed or entirely 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

precluded as a function of the evidence accrued by the end of P1 and hence the remaining 

distance to the decision -terminating bound, if any. These early terminations before or during 

P2 thus save any energy associated with further integration, at a cost to accuracy. In contrast, 

the downweighting model entails fully i ntegrating P2, but in a dampened manner with reduced 

SNR. 

In sum, our study provides novel insight into the neurocomputational mechanisms 

supporting decision making in a context where decisions need to be made on the basis of a 

single stimulus feature that is only intermittently available. Our task allowed us to identify 

novel functional characteristics of a well -established neural decision signal in the human EEG: 

the CPP. We show that in tasks where perceptually noisy evidence is presented intermittently 

in short bouts, the CPP does not maintain a sustained repr esentation of cumulative evidence, 

but rather engages in multiple rounds of evidence accumulation during those bouts , which in 

turn feed a continuously updating, sustained DV represented in downstream areas. This local 

evidence -processing property is consistent with recent work showing that the CPP encodes 

belief updates rather than the ongoing state of a DV in expanded judgment tasks involving the 

integration of a series of stimuli that are individually easy to identify (Parés -Pujolràs et al., 

2025) , and suggests that the CPP may only trace the entire evidence accumulation process 

underpinning decisions when the physical evidence is presented in one continuous stream 

(Geuzebroek et al., 2023; Kelly & O’Connell, 2013; O’Connell et al., 2012; Steinemann et al., 

2018) . Our results thus add to growing work suggesting that the neural architecture underlying 

evidence accumulation for decision -making can exhibit flexible functional roles in different 

contexts, underpinning adaptive behaviour. 

4. Methods 

Participants: Twenty -three participants were recruited to take part in Experiment 1, and 23 

different participants were recruited to take part in Experiment 2 of this study. In Experiment 

1, one participant withdrew after a few blocks of the task because they were feeli ng dizzy, and 

thus their data were excluded from further analysis. Two participants were unable to perform 

the task at the minimum required level of accuracy and were excluded from analysis in 

Experiment 2. A total of 22 (M = 21.5 years old, SD = 1.79 year s old, 10 females) and 21 (M 

= 22 years old, SD = 3.85 years old, 11 females) participants were thus included in the final 

samples for Experiment 1 and 2 respectively. All participants provided informed written 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

consent before participation in the study and were compensated for their time (10€/hour), and 

all procedures were approved by the University College Dublin Human Research Ethics 

Committee. 

Task: Participants performed a motion direction discrimination task adapted from Kiani et al. 

2013 using random dot kinematograms (RDK). The experiments consisted of a total of 700 

(Exp 1) and 933 trials (Exp 2), divided into blocks of 70 trials each. Most trials in the 

experiment were two -pulse trials (85.7%) and the remaining fraction were single -pulse trials 

(14.3%). In single -pu lse trials, the second pulse was not presented. Instead, the first pulse was 

followed by a 0% coherence lead -out period and then the trial terminated. The proportion of 

single - and two -pulse trials mirror the ones in the original Kiani et al. 2013 study. 

Stimuli were presented centrally on a standard monitor, and participants sat at a 50 -60cm 

distance from the monitor. Dots were presented within a 5° circular aperture at the center of 

the screen, the dot density was 16.7 dots/degree 2/s, and coherent dots moved at a speed of 5 

degrees/s. Due to a technical error, the monitor refresh rate was 60Hz for 19 participants and 

85Hz for 3 participants in Experiment 1, while it was 85Hz for 19 participants and 60Hz for 2 

participants in Experim ent 2. Each trial began with a white fixation cross presented at the centre 

of the display on black background. Then, a patch of 0% coherence dots appeared in blue colour 

on the centre of the screen (700 – 1050 ms, with short (700/750ms), medium (900/950ms) or 

long (1000/1050ms) delays appearing with a probability of 0.7,0.2 and 0.1, respectively). This 

was followed by a 200 ms pulse of yellow dots moving at either high or low coherence. After 

a gap of variable duration (Exp 1: [0, 0.5, 1] s, Exp 2: [0, 0.12, 0.36, 1.08] s) a second 200 ms 

pulse of either high or low coherence motion was presented. Finally, a patch of blue dots 

moving at 0% coherence was presented (700 to 1050 ms ) in blue. The fixation cross was visible 

throughout the trial to encourage participants not to follow the dots with their eyes. At the end 

of the final blue dot sequence, all stimuli disappeared. Trials were separated by a fixed 1s 

intertrial interval. Al l gap durations were equally likely, and all possible motion coherence 

combinations (low -low, low -high, high -low, high -high) and gap durations were randomly 

permuted throughout the experiment. Three gap durations were originally used in Experiment 

1 in ord er to maximise trial count for each of a small number of gap durations. Having observed 

that the participants utilised the second pulse less than the first, opposite to previous work 

(Kiani et al., 2013) , we ran a second experiment with shorter gap durations made more 

prevalent, on the basis that closer temporal contiguity might make it less likely that participants 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

would disengage from accumulation before the second pulse was presented and encourage 

continued accumulation. The expectations for a long gap to occur differed in our two 

experiments. Given the percentage of 1 -pulse trials, if the second pulse had not yet occurred 

500 ms after the 1st pulse the probability of it happening was higher in Experiment 1 (p = 0.666 

[1/3*85.7/(1/3*85.7+14.3)]) than in Experiment 2 (p = 0.6 [1/4*85.7/(1/4*85.7+14.3)]. 

Participants were told they had to respond after stimulus offset, with no time limit. Participants 

responded by pressing the “C” or “M” keys on a standard keyboard with the left and right 

thumb respectively. The blue and yellow colours used in the experiment were selected to be 

physically isoluminant , as measured on the lab monitor, in order to avoid large evoked 

potentials arising from strong luminance changes. 

Staircase procedure: In order to estimate the required dot coherence for participants to perform 

at 70% accuracy across coherence levels, all participants performed a staircase procedure 

consisting of 100 trials. All trials consisted of 0% coherence lead -in dots (700 to 1050 m s), a 

single pulse of evidence (200 ms) and a final sequence of 0% coherence lead -out dots (700 to 

1050 ms ). The staircase followed a 2 -down, 1 -up procedure (Levitt, 1971) , and the starting 

value was set to 40% for all participants. After two correct responses, the coherence was 

lowered. The initial step size was set to 6%, and it was halved every second time the staircase 

went down. This was done to achieve greater precisi on towards the end of the staircase. The 

average coherence of the dot motion in the last 40 trials of the staircase procedure were used 

to estimate the two coherence strengths used in the task. Specifically, high (Exp. 1: M = 

44.73%, SD = 12.64%; Exp 2: M = 33.04%, SD = 13.41%) and low (Exp. 1: M = 26.75%, SD 

= 7.74%; Exp 2: M =19.82%, SD = 8.04%) coherences were then set to be 25% higher or lower 

than the staircase -estimated coherence. 

To keep performance constant throughout the task, the average accuracy was checked after 

each block and coherence was dynamically adjusted between blocks. If accuracy was on 

average lower than 60% or higher than 90% across conditions, coherence was adjuste d by 

increasing or decreasing it by a tenth of the starting value obtained from the staircase procedure. 

This precaution was taken to avoid ceiling & floor effects. Most participants’ performance was 

stable throughout the task, and only a few required subs tantial adjustments of coherence 

between blocks (see Fig. S1 for individual data). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

EEG recording and preprocessing: Continuous EEG was recorded from 128 scalp electrodes 

using a BioSemi system with a sample rate of 512 Hz. Eye movements were recorded with four 

additional electro -oculogram (EOG) electrodes, two above and below the left eye and two at 

the outer canthi of each for vertical (VEOG) and horizontal HEOG) eye. Additionally, we 

recorded electromyogram (EMG) signals from the thenar eminence using two electrodes on 

the left and two on the right hand, as a standard procedure, though EMG was not of interest in 

the current study. All data were analysed in a Matlab R2021a using the EEGlab (Brunner et al., 

2013; Delorme & Makeig, 2004) and the ERPlab plugin (Lopez -Calderon & Luck, 2014) .

Continuous data were high -pass filtered at 0.1Hz, and low -pass filtered at 40 Hz using a zero -

phase shift Butterworth filter. Then, stimulus -locked epochs were generated from -1.5s to 3s 

around the onset of the first evidence pulse. Bad channels were defined as those exceeding 50 

standard deviation units, and were interpolated. Data were then re -referenced to the common 

average of all EEG channels. Trials where participants blinked during one of the evidence 

pulses were excluded from analysis. Eye movements occurring at any other time during the 

trial were removed from the data using Independent Component Analysis (ICA). Epochs were 

baseline -corrected relative to the 200 ms before the onset of the first evidence pulse, and 

channels showing ±150μV deviations were interpolated on a trial -by -trial basis using the TBT 

toolbox (Ben -Shachar, 2018) . If any given epoch had more than 20 bad channels, it was marked 

for rejection. Further, if any given channel was marked as “bad” on >30% of epochs, it was 

interpolated across the whole experiment. Finally, we applied a Current Source Density (CSD) 

transf orm (second spatial derivative) using the CSD toolbox (Kayser & Tenke, 2006) to the 

preprocessed data to reduce the spatial spread and thereby reduce overlap between topographic 

foci. Time frequency decomposition was performed using a 7 -cycle morlet wavelet transform, 

extracted in 1 -Hz steps in the 1 -40Hz range. Alpha and beta ban d power were obtained by 

averaging power in the 8 -12Hz and 13 -30Hz frequency ranges, respectively. 

Behavioural analysis: 

First, to investigate the effect of pulse coherence and gap duration on participants’ accuracy, 

we ran the following logistic regressions on one -pulse ( Eq. 1 ) and two -pulse trials ( Eq. 2 ): 

𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡 (𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 )~ 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ + [𝛽 0,𝑠 + 𝛽 1,𝑠 𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ] (1)

𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡 (𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 ) ~ 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ + 𝛽 2𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ + 𝛽 3𝐺𝑎𝑝 + 𝛽 4𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ ∗ 𝐺𝑎𝑝 +

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

+𝛽 5𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ ∗ 𝐺𝑎𝑝 +

[𝛽 0,𝑠 + 𝛽 1,𝑠 𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ + 𝛽 2,𝑠 𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ + 𝛽 3,𝑠 𝐺𝑎𝑝 + 𝛽 4,𝑠 𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ ∗ 𝐺𝑎𝑝 + 𝛽 5,𝑠 𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ ∗ 𝐺𝑎𝑝 ] (2)

Where terms between square brackets indicate random effects; s refers to each participant, and 

indicates that random effects (intercepts, or slopes) were calculated in addition to fixed effects 

for that particular coefficient. Next, to test whether participants were generally more accurate 

in two -pulse compared to one -pulse trials we ran the following logistic regression ( Eq. 3 ): 

𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡 (𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 ) ~ 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1𝑛𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑠 + 𝛽 2𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ + 𝛽 3𝑛𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑠 ∗ 𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ

[ 𝛽 0,𝑠 + 𝛽 1,𝑠 𝑛𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑠 + 𝛽 2,𝑠 𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ + 𝛽 3,𝑠 𝑛𝑃𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒𝑠 ∗ 𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ]

(3)

This analysis was restricted to two -pulse trials with equal coherences in the two pulses (HH, 

LL trials only) so that any effect of pulse number would be exclusively related to the presence 

of additional motion, rather than potentially capturing order or c oherence -consistency related 

effects. 

Then, to investigate the effect of pulse order on participants’ accuracy, we ran the following 

regression ( Eq. 4 ): 

𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡 (𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 ) ~ 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1(𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ + 𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ) + 𝛽 2(𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ − 𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ) +

[ 𝛽 0,𝑠 + 𝛽 1,𝑠 (𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ + 𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ) + 𝛽 2,𝑠 (𝑝 2𝑐𝑜 ℎ − 𝑝 1𝑐𝑜 ℎ)]

(4)

where the difference coefficient is expected to not be significant if the order of pulses does not 

influence performance. 

In all regressions, coherence values were normalised within participant because they were 

staircased for each participant individually and varied widely. All models included a maximal 

random effects structure , with a random intercept and random slopes for all fixed effects to 

control for interindividual variability. All models were fit using the ‘bobyqa’ optimiser in the 

lme4 toolbox (Bates, 2011) . In Experiment 2, this resulted in singular fits for both Eq. 2 and 3. 

Following previous suggestions, we used a weakly informative prior to regularise the random 

effects covariance matrix (Chung et al., 2015) using the blme package (Chung et al., 2013) ,

which resolved the singular fit problem. In cases where the model output flagged potential 

convergence problems, we assessed the robustness of parameter estimates by comparing them 

across 6 different optimisers using the ‘allFit’ function in lme4 toolbox (Bates, 2011) , as 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

advised by the developers . All such model fits were deemed to be robust as the optimiser 

estimates rarely deviated by more than one decimal point from the ‘bobyqa’ ones. 

Finally, we compared participants’ accuracy on two -pulse trials to the expected performance 

assuming perfect integration, and based on their accuracy in one -pulse trials. Following Kiani 

et al. 2013, we assumed that decisions are determined by the sign of the sum of evidence in the 

two pulses. The evidence distribution was inferred from participants’ accuracy on single -pulse 

trials as follows: 

𝑒 1 ~ 𝛷 −1(𝑃 1, 0,1)

𝑒 2 ~ 𝛷 −1(𝑃 2, 0,1) (5)

Where P1 and P2 are grand -average accuracies for high - and low -coherence one -pulse trials. 

𝚽 is the normal cumulative distribution function: 

𝛷 (𝑥 , 𝜇 , 𝜎 )~ ∫ 𝑁 

> 𝑥
> −∞

(𝑣 , 𝜇 , 𝜎 )𝑑𝑣 (6)

and 𝚽 -1 is its inverse. N(v, μ,σ) is the normal probability density function with mean ( μ = 0) 

and standard deviation (σ = 1). The expected accuracy for double -pulse trials was then 

calculated as follows: 

𝑃 𝑒 ~ 1 − 𝛷 (0, 𝑒 1 + 𝑒 2, √2) (7)

ERP analysis: 

CPP -P1 & CPP -P2 analysis: To investigate how centroparietal responses to the two sequential 

pulses varied with motion coherence, we extracted EEG activity from a cluster of centroparietal 

electrodes where activity at 500 ms after pulse 1 was maximal across conditions (see Fig 2 ). 

To compute CPP -P1 slopes, we fit a line from 0.2s post P1 o nset when the CPP appeared to 

begin building, to peak time for each participant individually and for each P1 coherence 

condition separately, restricting the peak search times around [0.4 -0.6s] post -P1. We then 

compared the slopes in those two conditions by running a paired -samples t -test. For CPP -P2 

visualisation, we removed P1 -related activity by subtracting the traces from the longest gap 

conditions [ -0.2 to 1.4s with respect to P1], from all traces. This resulted in an average EEG 

activity of 0 (see Fig. S4 ) preceding the second pulse, in all conditions, and rendered the key 

CPP -P2 findings more clearly visible by removing P1 -induced EEG drifts. Note that this does 

not affect the CPP -P2 activity in the long gap conditions, as the subtraction alters data up t o

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

the end of P2 but not further (see Fig. S4 ). We report the average across all non -zero gap 

conditions in the main manuscript ( Fig. 2 ), as well as the data sorted by gap in the 

supplementary material ( Fig. S3, S4 ). We also used the so -corrected activity to compare the 

relative amplitudes of CPP -P1 and CPP -P2 across all non -zero gap conditions. For this, we 

first computed the average amplitude 0.4 to 0.6s after P1 (in the raw data, CPP -P1 amp ) and P2 

(in the corrected data, CPP -P2 amp ), for each gap separately, and averaged across all non -zero 

gap conditions. Then, we computed the percentage of CPP -P1 amplitude reached by CPP -P2 

as CPP -P2 amp /CPP -P1 amp * 100. 

To investigate the impact of dot motion coherence on both CPP -P1 and CPP -P2 amplitudes 

(Fig. 3 ), we ran a series of time -resolved regressions: 

𝐶𝑃𝑃 𝑡 ~𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ + 𝑝 2𝐶𝑜 ℎ (8)

Where t indicates time from P1 for CPP -P1 analysis, and time after P2 for CPP -P2 analysis. 

For this analysis, we aligned all gap conditions to P1/P2 onset respectively and ran the 

regressions for all trials pooled, for each subject separately. For CPP -P2, data we re additionally 

baselined using 100ms before P2 onset to minimise the impact of gap duration on average 

amplitudes. All EEG data were low -pass filtered (6Hz) prior to running the regression to reduce 

the impact of high frequency noise on these single -tria l analyses. 

Next, to investigate how trial -to -trial variability in attention and evidence accumulation 

influenced performance, we ran a series of time -resolved logistic regressions. 

First, we investigated whether single -trial variability in centroparietal responses modulated the 

weight of pulses on choice. The interaction terms between pulse coherence and CPP amplitude 

in the following regression ( Eq. 9 ) thus test whether pulses which evoked a particularly high 

centroparietal response were also associated with that pulse having a greater weight on choice: 

𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡 (𝑃 (𝐶 ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 = 𝑟𝑖𝑔 ℎ𝑡 )) ~ 𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ + 𝑝 2𝐶𝑜 ℎ + 𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ ∗ 𝐶𝑃𝑃 𝑡 + 𝑝 2𝐶𝑜 ℎ ∗ 𝐶𝑃𝑃 𝑡 (9)

Where t indicates time after P1 for CPP -P1 analysis, and time after P2 for CPP -P2 analysis. 

Second, we ran an analogous analysis to investigate whether fluctuations in evoked occipital 

alpha desynchronisation also modulated the weight of each pulse on choice ( Eq. 10 ): 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑖𝑡 (𝑃 (𝐶 ℎ𝑜𝑖𝑐𝑒 = 𝑟𝑖𝑔 ℎ𝑡 ))~ 𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ + 𝑝 2𝐶𝑜 ℎ + 𝑝 1𝐶𝑜 ℎ ∗ −𝐴𝑙𝑝 ℎ𝑎 𝑡 + 𝑝 2 ∗ −𝐴𝑙𝑝 ℎ𝑎 𝑡 (10 )

Where t indicates time after P1 for alpha -P1 analysis, and time after P2 for alpha -P2 analysis. 

All regressors and EEG signals were z -scored across trials by timepoint. For alpha power 

analysis, we took the negative alpha power across a range of bilateral occipital electrodes (see 

highlighted electrodes in Fig. 2), so that positive coefficient values indicate that higher 

attention (i.e. lower alpha power) increase weight on choice or CPP amplitude. For the CPP 

analysis, we used the signal averaged over a cluster of centroparietal electrodes for CPP ( Fig. 

2B ). Regressions were run for each gap condition separately for times between [0 -1s] after each 

pulse, and the resulting coefficients were aligned to P1 and P2 and averaged across conditions. 

EEG statistics: EEG evoked potentials and regression results were statistically evaluated 

against zero using cluster -based permutations using the FieldTrip toolbox (Maris &

Oostenveld, 2007; Oostenveld et al., 2011) . All tests were two -tailed, cluster -corrected 

(p<0.05), and 10000 permutations were run. We additionally compared the magnitude of the 

occipital alpha level in the longest gap across the two experiments using an independent 

samples t -test in Matlab. 

Model fitting & simulations: In order to account for participants’ behaviour, we fit a simple 

diffusion model to the grand -averaged accuracy in the 4 conditions with three free parameters: 

bound ( b) and two drift rates ( d1, d2 ) corresponding to the low and high coherence conditions. 

The accumulator model followed this basic equation: 

𝑦 𝑡 ~ 𝑦 𝑡 −1 + 𝑑 + 𝑁 0,𝜎 (11 )

Where yt is the accumulator output or decision variable (DV) for any time t within a pulse 

(where d=d1 or d = d2 depending on coherence). Gaussian noise, N0,σ , was added in order to 

represent noisy sensory evidence through the trial. During the gap, the accumulator was set to 

stay stable at its final within -pulse value so that yt was set to equal yt-1 for any time t outside of 

pulses during which incoherent motion was presented and dots were blue. Given the 

behavioural observation that overall accuracy did not decrease in longer gap durations, and the 

fact that evidence pulses were clearly indicated by a change in the dots colour, the DV was 

paused and not allowed to further accumulate the noise dur ing the 0% coherence motion gap 

separating the two pulses. When the DV crossed a bound ‘ b’, evidence accumulation 

terminated. The accumulator assumed no noise or leak during the gap, and in any trials where 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

the bound was not crossed accumulation continued upon presentation of the next pulse. Note 

that this one -dimensional, continuous, bounded accumulator represents the overall DV 

corresponding to the level of motor preparation. As we explain below, the CPP wa s simulated 

by extracting the single -pulse components of this model. 

We fit the model by minimising G 2 with the particleswarm function in the Global Optimisation 

Toolbox for Matlab. G 2 is a goodness of fit measure that in this study quantified how much 

predicted accuracies differed from observed ones in each condition. 

Computational models were fit to the two experiments separately simulating 10000 trials for 

each condition, and the best fitting parameters were then used to simulate CPP traces. Akaike 

Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayes Information Criterion (BIC) were computed to assess 

the goodness of fit as follows: 

𝐴𝐼𝐶 = 𝐺 2 + 2 ∗ 𝑘 (12 )

𝐵𝐼𝐶 = 𝐺 2 + 𝑘 ∗ log (𝑛 ) (13 )

Where k indicates the number of free parameters for a given model, and n represents the number 

of trials used to fit the model. 

Neural data simulation: 

We simulated MBL activity by taking the evolving value of the simulated decision variable 

throughout the trial. If a bound was hit, the DV was set to stay stable in order to account for 

the sustained nature of MBL signals our empirical data as well as prev ious work in delayed 

response tasks (Murphy et al., 2021; Parés -Pujolràs et al., 2025; Twomey et al., 2016) .

In turn, following previous work, we simulated the CPP by taking the absolute value of the 

underlying, signed accumulator traces unfolding during each individual pulse, produced by the 

best fitting parameters of our model (Afacan -Seref et al., 2018; Kelly et al., 2021) . Taking the 

absolute value implicitly assumes that the differential evidence accumulator is implemented 

via two separate neural populations that encode values respectively favouring one or the other 

alternative. If the simulated decision variable hit a bo und, the accumulator traces were set to 

fall back down to zero within 200 ms after hitting the bound, based on past observations of 

post -peak CPP dynamics (Steinemann et al., 2018) . In the model shown in the main text, if the 

overall DV did not hit a bound by the end of the first pulse, it was assumed that the cumulative 

evidence level attained thus far was sustained in the overall DV at the motor level, but that the 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

intermediate accumulator fell back to its zero baseline level, and restarted accumulation upon 

the presentation of the second pulse, which at the motor level added to the already sustained 

level. Variants of this scheme were also explored, as explained in Fig. S7, S8 . In order to 

qualitatively compare how well various decay parameters matched the empirical CPP 

dynamics, we computed the relative CPP -P2/CPP -P1 percentage amplitude predicted by 

various models by extracting the average evoked amplitude of the simulated CP P [0 -0.2s] for 

each pulse separately, with respect to the pre -pulse baseline amplitude. This 0.2s interval is 

analogous to the time used for analysis of the empirical data (see above), but is set to an earlier 

time period because our simulations did not in corporate any sensory delay, and therefore 

ramping activity started instantly after stimulus onset. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by a grant from Science Foundation Ireland (now Taighde Éireann) 

under grant number 19/US/3599, an Investigator Award from the Wellcome Trust under grant 

number 219572/Z/19/Z (to S.P.K) and a grant from the European Research Council (ERC): 

Consolidator Grant ‘IndDecision’ under grant number 865474. The authors would also like to 

thank Mike Shadlen for discussions on this work, and students Liang Tong and Bowen Duan 

for assistance during data collection. 

Author contributions 

Conceptualisation: E.P -P, & S.P.K; software: E.P -P; data curation & analysis: E.P -P.; 

resources: S.P.K.; writing of original draft: E.P -P.; review & editing: E.P -P, R.G.O., A.C.G, & 

S.P.K.; supervision: S.P.K. 

Data & code: 

All raw EEG and behavioural data in this study as well as analysis code are publicly available 

in an OSF repository : https://osf.io/z7dp2/ 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

References 

Afacan -Seref, K., Steinemann, N. A., Blangero, A., & Kelly, S. P. (2018). Dynamic Interplay 

of Value and Sensory Information in High -Speed Decision Making. Current Biology ,

28 (5), 795 -802.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CUB.2018.01.071 

Azizi, Z., & Ebrahimpour, R. (2023). Explaining Integration of Evidence Separated by 

Temporal Gaps with Frontoparietal Circuit Models. Neuroscience , 509 , 74 –95. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUROSCIENCE.2022.10.019 

Balsdon, T., Mamassian, P., & Wyart , V. (2021). Separable neural signatures of confidence 

during perceptual decisions. eLife , 10 . https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.68491 

Balsdon, T., Wyart, V., & Mamassian, P. (2020). Confidence controls perceptual evidence 

accumulation. Nature Communications , 11 . https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -

15561 -w

Bates, D. M. (2011). Mixed models in R using the lme4 package Part 1: Linear mixed models 

with simple , scalar random effects. Analysis , 1–27. 

https://doi.org/10.2174/1568008054863754 

Ben -Shachar, M. S. (2018). TBT: Reject and Interpolate channels on a trial -by -trial basis. 

Zenodo .

Bronfman, Z. Z., Brezis, N., & Usher, M. (2016). Non -monotonic Temporal -Weighting 

Indicates a Dynamically Modulated Evidence -Integration Mechanism. PLOS 

Computational Biology , 12 (2), e1004667. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1004667 

Brunner, C., Delorme, A., Makeig, S., & Diego, S. (2013). EEGLAB – AN OPEN SOURCE 

MATLAB TOOLBOX FOR ELECTROPHYSIOLOGICAL RESEARCH . c, 8–9. 

https://doi.org/10.1515/bmt -2013 -4

Brunton, B. W., Botvinick, M. M., & Brody, C. D. (2013). Rats and humans can optimally 

accumulate evidence for decision -making. Science , 340 (6128), 95 –98. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/SCIENCE.1233912/SUPPL_FILE/BRUNTON.SM.PDF 

Cheadle, S., Wyart, V., Tsetsos, K., Myers, N., de Gardelle, V., Herce Castañón, S., & 

Summerfield, C. (2014). Adaptive Gain Control during Human Perceptual Choice. 

Neuron , 81 (6), 1429 –1441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.01.020 

Chung, Y., Gelman, A., Rabe -Hesketh, S., Liu, J., & Dorie, V. (2015). Weakly Informative 

Prior for Point Estimation of Covariance Matrices in Hierarchical Models. Journal of 

Educational and Behavioral Statistics , 40 (2), 136 –157. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Chung, Y., Rabe -Hesketh, S., Dorie, V., Gelman, A., & Liu, J. (2013). A Nondegenerate 

Penalized Likelihood Estimator for Variance Parameters in Multilevel Models. 

Psychometrika , 78 (4), 685 –709. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11336 -013 -9328 -2

de Lange, F. P., Rahnev, D. A., Donner, T. H., & Lau, H. (2013). Prestimulus oscillatory 

activity over motor cortex reflects perceptual expectations. Journal of Neuroscience ,

33 (4), 1400 –1410. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1094 -12.2013 

Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single -

trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal of 

Neuroscience Methods , 134 (1), 9 –21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009 

Donner, T. H., Siegel, M., Fries, P., & Engel, A. K. (2009). Buildup of Choice -Predictive 

Activity in Human Motor Cortex during Perceptual Decision Making. Current Biology .

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.07.066 

Feuerriegel, D., Jiwa, M., Turner, W. F., Andrejević, M., Hester, R., & Bode, S. (2021). 

Tracking dynamic adjustments to decision making and performance monitoring 

processes in conflict tasks. NeuroImage , 238 , 118265. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118265 

Foxe, J. J., & Snyder, A. C. (2011). The role of alpha -band brain oscillations as a sensory 

suppression mechanism during selective attention. Frontiers in Psychology , 2(JUL), 

10747. https://doi.org/10.3389/FPSYG.2011.00154/BIBTEX 

Geuzebroek, A. C., Craddock, H., O’Connell, R. G., & Kelly, S. P. (2023). Balancing true and 

false detection of intermittent sensory targets by adjusting the inputs to the evidence 

accumulation process. eLife , 12 . https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.83025 

Gherman, S., Markowitz, N., Tostaeva, G., Espinal, E., Mehta, A. D., O’Connell, R. G., Kelly, 

S. P., & Bickel, S. (2024). Intracranial electroencephalography reveals effector -

independent evidence accumulation dynamics in multiple human brain regions. Nature 

Human Behaviour 2024 8:4 , 8(4), 758 –770. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -024 -

01824 -9

Glickman, M., Moran, R., & Usher, M. (2022). Evidence integration and decision confidence 

are modulated by stimulus consistency. Nature Human Behaviour , 6(7), 988 –999. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -022 -01318 -6

Gold, J. I., & Shadlen, M. N. (2007). The neural basis of decision making. Annual Review of 

Neuroscience , 30 , 535 –574. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.113038 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

Golmohamadian, M., Faraji, M., Fallah, F., Sharifizadeh, F., & Ebrahimpour, R. (2025). 

Flexibility in choosing decision policies in gathering discrete evidence over time. PLOS 

ONE , 20 (1), e0316320. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0316320 

Gould, I. C., Nobre, A. C., Wyart , V., & Rushworth, M. F. S. (2012). Effects of Decision 

Variables and Intraparietal Stimulation on Sensorimotor Oscillatory Activity in the 

Human Brain. Journal of Neuroscience , 32 (40), 13805 –13818. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2200 -12.2012 

Haegens, S., Nácher, V., Hernández, A., Luna, R., Jensen, O., & Romo, R. (2011). Beta 

oscillations in the monkey sensorimotor network reflect somatosensory decision 

making. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 (26), 10708 –10713. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1107297108 

Haegens, S., Vergara, J., Rossi -Pool, R., Lemus, L., & Romo, R. (2017). Beta oscillations 

reflect supramodal information during perceptual judgment. Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences , 114 (52), 13810 –13815. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1714633115 

Hanks, T. D., & Summerfield, C. (2017). Perceptual Decision Making in Rodents, Monkeys, 

and Humans. Neuron , 93 (1), 15 –31. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEURON.2016.12.003 

Heekeren , H. R., Marrett, S., & Ungerleider, L. G. (2008). The neural systems that mediate 

human perceptual decision making. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2008 9:6 , 9(6), 467 –

479. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2374 

Herding, J., Spitzer, B., & Blankenburg, F. (2016). Upper Beta Band Oscillations in Human 

Premotor Cortex Encode Subjective Choices in a Vibrotactile Comparison Task. 

Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 28 (5), 668 –679. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00932 

Hyafil , A., Rocha, J. de la, Pericas, C., Katz, L. N., Huk, A. C., & Pillow, J. W. (2023). 

Temporal integration is a robust feature of perceptual decisions. eLife , 12 .

https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.84045 

Kayser, J., & Tenke, C. E. (2006). Principal components analysis of Laplacian waveforms as a 

generic method for identifying ERP generator patterns: I. Evaluation with auditory 

oddball tasks. Clinical Neurophysiology , 117 (2), 348 –368. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2005.08.034 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

Kelly, S. P., Corbett, E. A., & O’Connell, R. G. (2021). Neurocomputational mechanisms of 

prior -informed perceptual decision -making in humans. Nature Human Behaviour , 5(4), 

467 –481. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -020 -00967 -9

Kelly, S. P., & O’Connell, R. G. (2013). Internal and External Influences on the Rate of Sensory 

Evidence Accumulation in the Human Brain. Journal of Neuroscience , 33 (50), 19434 –

19441. https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.3355 -13.2013 

Keung, W., Hagen, T. A., & Wilson, R. C. (2019). Regulation of evidence accumulation by 

pupil -linked arousal processes. Nature Human Behaviour , 3(6), 636 –645. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -019 -0551 -4

Keung, W., Hagen, T. A., & Wilson, R. C. (2020). A divisive model of evidence accumulation 

explains uneven weighting of evidence over time. Nature Communications , 11 (1), 

2160. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -15630 -0

Kiani, R., Churchland, A. K., & Shadlen , M. N. (2013). Integration of direction cues is invariant 

to the temporal gap between them. Journal of Neuroscience , 33 (42), 16483 –16489. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2094 -13.2013 

Kiani, R., Hanks, T. D., & Shadlen, M. N. (2008). Bounded integration in parietal cortex 

underlies decisions even when viewing duration is dictated by the environment. The 

Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience , 28 (12), 

3017 –3029. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4761 -07.2008 

Lange, R. D., Chattoraj, A., Beck, J. M., Yates, J. L., & Haefner, R. M. (2021). A confirmation 

bias in perceptual decision -making due to hierarchical approximate inference. PLOS 

Computational Biology , 17 (11), e1009517. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1009517 

Levitt, H. (1971). Transformed Up -Down Methods in Psychoacoustics. The Journal of the 

Acoustical Society of America , 49 (2B), 467 –477. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1912375 

Liu, T., & Pleskac, T. J. (2011). Neural correlates of evidence accumulation in a perceptual 

decision task. Journal of Neurophysiology , 106 (5), 2383 –2398. 

https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00413.2011 

Lopez -Calderon, J., & Luck, S. J. (2014). ERPLAB: An open -source toolbox for the analysis 

of event -related potentials. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 8(1 APR). 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00213 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

Maris, E., & Oostenveld, R. (2007). Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG - and MEG -data. 

Journal of Neuroscience Methods , 164 (1), 177 –190. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2007.03.024 

Mazurek, M. E., Roitman, J. D., Ditterich, J., & Shadlen, M. N. (2003). A Role for Neural 

Integrators in Perceptual Decision Making. Cerebral Cortex , 13 (11), 1257 –1269. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/CERCOR/BHG097 

McCone, H., Devine, C. A., McNickle, E., Dully, J., Geuzebroek , A. C., McGovern, D. P., 

Kelly, S. P., & O’Connell, R. G. (2026). A Movement -Independent Signature of 

Urgency During Human Perceptual Decision Making. Journal of Neuroscience .

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1445 -25.2025 

Murphy, P. R., Boonstra, E., & Nieuwenhuis, S. (2016). Global gain modulation generates 

time -dependent urgency during perceptual choice in humans. Nature Communications ,

7(May), 1 –14. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13526 

Murphy, P. R., Wilming, N., Hernandez -Bocanegra, D. C., Prat -Ortega, G., & Donner, T. H. 

(2021). Adaptive circuit dynamics across human cortex during evidence accumulation 

in changing environments. Nature Neuroscience , 24 (7), 987 –997. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -021 -00839 -z

O’Connell, R. G., Dockree, P. M., & Kelly, S. P. (2012). A supramodal accumulation -to -bound 

signal that determines perceptual decisions in humans. Nature Neuroscience , (October). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3248 

O’Connell, R. G., & Kelly, S. P. (2021). Neurophysiology of Human Perceptual Decision -

Making . https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -neuro -092019 

Okazawa, G., & Kiani, R. (2023). Annual Review of Physiology Neural Mechanisms That Make 

Perceptual Decisions Flexible . https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -physiol -031722 

Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., & Schoffelen, J. M. (2011). FieldTrip: Open source 

software for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. 

Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience . https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/156869 

Pape, A. -A., & Siegel, M. (2016). Motor cortex activity predicts response alternation during 

sensorimotor decisions. Nature Communications , 7(1), 13098. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13098 

Parés -Pujolràs, E., Kelly, S. P., & Murphy, P. R. (2025). Dissociable encoding of evolving 

beliefs and momentary belief updates in distinct neural decision signals. Nature 

Communications 2025 16:1 , 16 (1), 1 –14. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -025 -58861 -9

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

Park, H., Arazi, A., Talluri, B. C., Celotto, M., Panzeri, S., Stocker, A. A., & Donner, T. H. 

(2025). Confirmation bias through selective readout of information encoded in human 

parietal cortex. Nature Communications , 16 (1), 5391. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -

025 -61010 -x

Pereira, M., Megevand, P., Tan, M. X., Chang, W., Wang, S., Rezai, A., Seeck, M., Corniola ,

M., Momjian, S., Bernasconi, F., Blanke, O., & Faivre, N. (2021). Evidence 

accumulation relates to perceptual consciousness and monitoring. Nature 

Communications , 12 (1), 3261. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -021 -23540 -y

Pfurtscheller, G., & Lopes da Silva, F. H. (1999). Event -related EEG/MEG synchronization 

and desynchronization: Basic principles. Clinical Neurophysiology , 110 (11), 1842 –

1857. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1388 -2457(99)00141 -8

Ploran, E. J., Nelson, S. M., Velanova , K., Donaldson, D. I., Petersen, S. E., & Wheeler, M. E. 

(2007). Evidence Accumulation and the Moment of Recognition: Dissociating 

Perceptual Recognition Processes Using fMRI. Journal of Neuroscience , 27 (44), 

11912 –11924. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3522 -07.2007 

Rassi, E., Zhang, Y., Mendoza, G., Méndez, J. C., Merchant, H., & Haegens, S. (2023). Distinct 

beta frequencies reflect categorical decisions. Nature Communications , 14 (1), 2923. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -023 -38675 -3

Rohenkohl, G., & Nobre, A. C. (2011). Alpha Oscillations Related to Anticipatory Attention 

Follow Temporal Expectations. Journal of Neuroscience , 31 (40), 14076 –14084. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3387 -11.2011 

Rouault, M., Weiss, A., Lee, J. K., Drugowitsch, J., Chambon, V., & Wyart, V. (2022). 

Controllability boosts neural and cognitive signatures of changes -of -mind in uncertain 

environments. eLife , 11 . https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.75038 

Shadlen , M. N., & Kiani, R. (2013). Decision making as a window on cognition. Neuron , 80 (3), 

791 –806. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.047 

Sospedra, A., Canals, S., Marcos, E., Hernández, M., & Joan, S. (2025). A temporal gap in 

sensory streams amplifies the influence of subsequent input on decision making. 

bioRxiv , 2024.07.17.603868. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.17.603868 

Stancák, A., & Pfurtscheller , G. (1995). Desynchronization and recovery of β rhythms during 

brisk and slow self -paced finger movements in man. Neuroscience Letters , 196 (1 –2), 

21 –24. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304 -3940(95)11827 -J

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41 

Steinemann, N. A., O’Connell, R. G., & Kelly, S. P. (2018). Decisions are expedited through 

multiple neural adjustments spanning the sensorimotor hierarchy. Nature 

Communications , 9(1), 3627. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -018 -06117 -0

Stockart, F., Msheik, R., Robin, A., Jurkovičová, L., Goueytes , D., Rouy, M., Mareček, R., 

Hoffmann, D., Mudrik, L., Roman, R., Brázdil, M., Minotti, L., Kahane, P., Pereira, 

M., & Faivre, N. (2025). Cortical evidence accumulation for visual perception occurs 

irrespective of reports. Nature Communications , 16 (1), 8458. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -025 -63255 -y

Tohidi -Moghaddam, M., Zabbah, S., Olianezhad, F., & Ebrahimpour, R. (2019). Sequence -

dependent sensitivity explains the accuracy of decisions when cues are separated with 

a gap. Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics , 81 (8), 2745 –2754. 

https://doi.org/10.3758/S13414 -019 -01810 -8/FIGURES/6 

Tremel, J. J., & Wheeler, M. E. (2015). Content -specific evidence accumulation in inferior 

temporal cortex during perceptual decision -making. NeuroImage , 109 , 35 –49. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.12.072 

Tsetsos , K., Gao, J., McClelland, J. L., & Usher, M. (2012). Using time -varying evidence to 

test models of decision dynamics: Bounded diffusion vs. The leaky competing 

accumulator model. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 6(JUN), 1–17. 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2012.00079 

Twomey, D. M., Kelly, S. P., & O’Connell, R. G. (2016). Abstract and effector -selective 

decision signals exhibit qualitatively distinct dynamics before delayed perceptual 

reports. Journal of Neuroscience , 36 (28), 7346 –7352. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4162 -15.2016 

Urai, A. E., De Gee, J. W., Tsetsos, K., & Donner, T. H. (2019). Choice history biases 

subsequent evidence accumulation. eLife , 8, 1 –34. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.46331 

Urai, A. E., & Donner, T. H. (2022). Persistent activity in human parietal cortex mediates 

perceptual choice repetition bias. Nature Communications , 13 (1), 6015. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -022 -33237 -5

Van Den Brink, R. L., Murphy, P. R., Desender , K., De Ru, N., & Nieuwenhuis, S. (2021). 

Temporal expectation hastens decision onset but does not affect evidence quality. 

Journal of Neuroscience , 41 (1), 130 –143. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1103 -

20.2020 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42 

Van Diepen, R. M., Foxe, J. J., & Mazaheri, A. (2019). The functional role of alpha -band 

activity in attentional processing: The current zeitgeist and future outlook. Current 

Opinion in Psychology , 29 , 229 –238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2019.03.015 

Waskom, M. L., & Kiani, R. (2018). Decision Making through Integration of Sensory Evidence 

at Prolonged Timescales. Current Biology , 28 (23), 3850 -3856.e9. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.10.021 

Wilming, N., Murphy, P. R., Meyniel, F., & Donner, T. H. (2020). Large -scale dynamics of 

perceptual decision information across human cortex. Nature Communications , 11 (1), 

5109. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -18826 -6

Wyart, V., de Gardelle , V., Scholl, J., & Summerfield, C. (2012). Rhythmic Fluctuations in 

Evidence Accumulation during Decision Making in the Human Brain. Neuron , 76 (4), 

847 –858. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.09.015 

Wyart, V., Myers, N. E., & Summerfield, C. (2015). Neural mechanisms of human perceptual 

choice under focused and divided attention. Journal of Neuroscience , 35 (8), 3485 –

3498. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3276 -14.2015 

Yates, J. L., Park, I. M., Katz, L. N., Pillow, J. W., & Huk, A. C. (2017). Functional dissection 

of signal and noise in MT and LIP during decision -making. Nature Neuroscience ,

20 (9), 1285 –1292. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4611 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

Supplementary material 

Figure S1. Individual participants’ accuracy ( grey bars ) and average coherence ( red line ) for 

each block in Experiments 1 ( A) and 2 ( B). On average, most participants performed close to 

70% accuracy and clearly above chance ( solid black line ), and only required minimal coherence 

adjustments between blocks. The data of participants 1 and 21 in Experiment 2 were excluded 

from further analysis due to poor task performance in a majority of blocks. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

Figure S2. Sensitivity to evidence strength in the two pulses in motor beta lateralisation 

signals. A. Grand -averaged (±SEM) motor beta lateralisation [Contra -Ipsilateral hemispheres 

with respect to correct response hand] after pulse 1 (MBL -P1), averaged across all gap 

conditions and across all trials regardless of accuracy. Motor preparation started shortl y after 

the first pulse, and was sustained at a coherence -dependent level. B. Grand -averaged MBL 

after pulse 2 (MBL -P2), averaged over all non -zero gaps in the two experiments. C. Effect of 

P1 coherence on MBL after P2. Traces illustrate the grand -averaged (±SEM) aligned to pulse 

2 (MBL -P2), averaged over all non -zero gaps and across P2 coherence. D. Effect of P2 

coherence on MBL after P2. Traces illustrate the grand -averaged (±SEM) aligned to pulse 2 

(MBL -P2), averaged over all non -zero gaps and across P1 coherence. In panels A-D, inset bar 

graphs illustrate the MBL excursion as the difference between activity at [0.6 -0.8s, shaded 

area] after pulse onset, minus activity at baseline [ -0.2 -0s]. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45 

Figure S3. A,C. Motor beta lateralisation (MBL) for each gap condition, sorted by P1 

coherence in experiments 1 (A) and 2 (C). Lateralisation is computed as a function of actual 

dot motion [Contra -Ipsilateral hemispheres with respect to correct response hand], sorted by 

gap duration and P1 coherence pooled across correct & error trials. B,D. Centroparietal activity 

for each gap condition, and sorted P1 coherence in experiments 1 ( B) and 2 ( D). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

Figure S4. A,C. Centroparietal activity sorted by gap, P1 and P2 coherence in Experiments 1 

and 2. B,D. Centroparietal activity after removing CPP -P1 activity. For each condition, the 

average of long -gap trials with the same P1 coherence was removed. That is, the average of the 

long gap HH & HL conditions was subtracted from HH and HL traces. Similarly, the average 

activity of the long gap LL & LH conditions was subtracted from LL and LH traces. This 

removes overlapping CPP -P1 potentials, and isolates centroparietal activity related to P2. 

Subtractions were performed between [ -0.2 to 1.4s] from P1 presentatio n. Thus, CPP -P2 

potentials in the long gap condition remain unaltered. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

47 

Figure S5. Replication of results in Fig. 3 , now performing the analysis on CPP -P2 data ( B-

D) without removing CPP -P1 activity. Note that baseline activity shows a drift consistent with 

the overlapping potentials from the preceding pulse, which is corrected for when removing 

CPP -P1 activity (cf. Fig. 3). Note also that the same patterns are quali tatively present in the 

uncorrected data. Panels C -D illustrate conditions pooled by P1 or P2 coherence, respectively, 

to highlight the different direction of the effect. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

48 

Figure S6. Model -predicted (A -B) and observed (C -D) CPP -P1 and -P2, in correct vs. incorrect 

responses, for Experiments 1 (top) and 2 (bottom). Bar graph insets in A -B indicate the state 

of the simulated accumulator at the end of pulse 1 in those trials where the bou nd was not hit. 

Positive values indicate that the accumulator was leaning towards the correct answer, whereas 

negative values indicate that it was leaning towards an error. The model predicts stronger P1 

coherence effects in correct compared to error tria ls (A -B, left), with this effect also being 

observed in empirical data across both experiments (C -D, left). For the sake of clarity, we do 

not plot LL and HH conditions in the empirical CPP -P2 data because no clear amplitude 

differences are predicted by th e model in correct vs. error trials, and the trial count in the HH 

condition was insufficient in most participants. Further, the model predicted a strong 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

49 

interaction in CPP -P2 amplitudes in the HH vs. HL condition. While correct trials (which were 

the majority of trials in our task and the model) showed higher amplitudes at CPP -P2 for HL 

compared to the LH condition (A, right), consistent with the effect of P1 on CPP -P1 amplitudes 

reported in Fig 3, this effect reversed in incorrect trials (B, right). This interaction was also 

clearly visible in Experiment 2, although slightly less prominent in Experiment 1. Note 

however that Experiment 1 had fewer overall trials, and power to detect differences is likely to 

be insufficient after splitting conditions by accuracy. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

50 

Figure S7. Simulations (N=1000) illustrating the effect of various signal decay time (A -C) 

and decay delay (D -E) assumptions on the predicted CPP activity. Simulations are based on 

the fitted model in the main manuscript and for Exp. 1 only for illustration purposes. Given 

that it’s unclear whether the CPP fall -down to zero when evidence is paused follows the same 

dynamics as its fall -down when it hits a bound (where studies with immediate behavioural 

responses suggest that it reaches zero within approximately 200ms; Steinemann et al 2018), we 

simulated its CPP activity under three different assumptions about the duration of its decay 

upon evidence interruption (i.e. when blue dots appear onscreen after a pulse). We simulated 

the CPP assuming the signal takes 100 ms ( A), 500 ms ( B) or 1000 ms ( C) to go back to 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

51 

baseline at pulse offset when a bound had not been reached, retaining a 200 ms fall -down upon 

bound -crossing. Longer signal decay times for trials where no bound was hit result in a 

protracted ramp down to baseline. In turn, it is unclear whether any post -decisional evidence 

accumulation is to be allowed to simulate the CPP in this context, given that previous studies 

have observed varying delays in signal decay after response ( Steinemann et al. 20 18 ; Afacan -

Seref et al., 2011). In the manuscript, we assumed no delay between bound crossing and signal 

decay. Here, we simulated the CPP allowing it to continue building up 50ms (D) or 100ms (E) 

after bound crossing, while setting it to immediately decay upon blue dot offset. Allowing some 

post -decisional build -up resulted in higher average CPP amplitudes, and it also better 

recapitulated some features of the data, including a protracted build -up in the zero -gap 

condition compared to all others. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

52 

Figure S8. Simulated CPPs using the same computational model as in Fig. 5, but under the 

assumption that the signal was only reset to baseline if a bound was hit. If the bound was not 

hit, the accumulator, like the downstream DV at the motor level, was set to stay s table at the 

final value reached by the end of pulse 1 with no decay and no added noise for the whole 

duration of the gap. Given that we do not model reaction times, we assumed no transmission 

delay between events on the screen and their impact on the accu mulator. In this model, the 

partial fall down of the signal during the gap was driven by those trials that hit a bound 

following the first pulse. Conversely, the fact that it did not fall all the way to 0 on average 

during the gap is driven by those trials where the DV did not hit a bound during processing of 

pulse 1 and thus sustained through the gap. Accumulation resumed from that sustained level 

upon presentation of a second pulse, and the fact that on average CPP -P2 traces reach lower 

amplitudes than CP P-P1 evoked activities is explained by the fact that trials that were 

terminated during the first pulse did not engage in accumulation again, and therefore took value 

0 in our model. Note that this model provides a qualitatively worse fit to the empirical CPP 

traces during the gap and CPP -P2 trials. In particular, the magnitude of the CPP -P2 potentials 

was predicted to be significantly smaller (Exp. 1: CPP -P2 = 19% of CPP -P1 peak amplitude; 

Exp. 2: CPP -P2 = 13% of CPP -P1 peak amplitude) than observed on th e grand -averaged data 

(CPP -P2 = approximately 50% of CPP -P1 in both experiments; see Fig. 2 ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

53 

Figure S9 . Occipital alpha power tracks dynamics of attentional engagement and varies 

with temporal expectations. A. Grand -averaged (±SEM) occipital alpha power in the long 

gap conditions sorted by P1 coherence, again baseline -corrected before the onset of the first 

pulse. At evidence offset, alpha steeply increased, and, interestingly, attained and maintained 

a higher l evel during the longer gaps than the baseline before the first pulse (two -tailed cluster 

permutation test, p < 0.05 in both experiments; see Fig. 2A ). One possible interpretation is that 

this reflects attentional disengagement from the decision occurring after early decision 

termination. However, if this was the case, we would expect this effect to be dependent on 

pulse 1 coherence, as it is more like ly for a DV to have reached a bound after a high -coherence 

pulse ( Fig. 4B ), and we observed no such coherence -dependence in alpha power during the 

gap. Topographies illustrate the difference in alpha power between P1 -high and P1 -low 

coherence trials [ -0.2 to 0s] before P2 onset. B. Occipital alpha power in the longest gap 

condition in the two experiments. In Experiment 2, where the event distribution was skewed 

towards short gap durations between the first and second pulses, participants’ occipital alpha 

was significantly higher (ind icating lower attention) than in Experiment 1 (* p<0.05; two -

sample t -test for the difference in alpha power between occipital activity [ -0.1 0s] before P2 

and the baseline [ -0.2 0s] before P1. Alpha power has been linked to temporal expectation 

encoding ( Rohenkohl & Nobre, 2011), as well as being a well -known index of attentional 

engagement (Thut et al., 2006). Thus, this difference is interesting in light of the difference in 

gap durations in our two experiments, and hence temporal expectations. In partic ular, in those 

trials where no second pulse had been presented after a 0.5s gap, the probability of the second 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

54 

pulse yet appearing was 0.67 in Experiment 1, compared to 0.6 in Experiment 2. Although 

another difference between experiments was that early terminations within pulse 1 occurred 

more often in Experiment 2, as predicted by our model (see Fig. 4B ), the probability of early 

terminations is unlikely to be the key influence given the above finding that alpha power during 

the gap was not dependent on P1 coherence ( A). Rather than reflecting switches between 

engagement and disengagement at the decision level, then, it may reflect a gating function at 

the sensory processing level that operates independent of whether early bound -crossings have 

happened, yet is modulated between contexts depending on the likelihood of a second pulse 

still to come. The dotted box indicates the test period. In all panels, shaded areas indicate the 

timing of evidence pulses for the relevant gap durations. *Markers along the bottom of panel 

A indicate significant clusters where alpha power differed from zero (two -tailed cluster -based 

permutation test, p<0.05). In panel B, they indicate significant clusters where alpha power 

differed in P1 -high vs. P1 -low coherence trials. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

55 

Figure S10. Model comparison investigating the effect of drift rate variability at the 

second pulse . In our main analysis, we initially fit a model with two different drift rates for 

low (d1) and high (d2) coherence pulses: Model 1 (k = 3, b, d1, d2) . Here, we explored whether 

increased temporal uncertainty about whether and when a second pulse might appear could 

have led to more variable attentional states before its appearance, and as a consequence more 

variable drift rates. To test this hypothesis, we extended the model with one additional free 

parameter introducing trial -by -trial variability to the drift rates applied to pulse 2: Model 2 (k 

= 4: b, d_low, d_high, dvar_p2). This model resulted in the lowest overall error as measured 

by G 2, but the additional complexity was not warranted according to AIC/BIC metrics. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

56 

Figure S11. Weight on choice modulations by single -trial fluctuations in neural evidence 

accumulation and attention markers. In this analysis, we sought to investigate whether 

single -trial fluctuations in the neural correlates of evidence accumulation and attention were 

linked to variability in choice behaviour. To do so, we exploited the trial -by -trial variability in 

the neural signals. A. Standardized regression coefficients (±SEM) resulting from Eq. 9, 

illustrating the effect of CPP -P1 ( left ) and CPP -P2 ( right ) variability on choice, averaged across 

all gap conditions. The magnitude of CPP -P1 modulated the impact of the first pulse on choices 

in both experiments while the magnitude of CPP -P2 only modulated the relative weight of P2 

in Experiment 2. In our task , variability in the CPP may be related to trial -by -trial variability 

in motion energy, as well as random noise. Since the weight on choice of P1 and P2 may trade -

off with one another due to a bound being set – i.e. on trials where P1 has a strong influenc e, 

P2 is likely to have a weaker one - we also computed the difference between the two modulatory 

terms ([P1coh*CPP - minus P2coh*CPP], for CPP -P1 and CPP -P2 respectively). This 

difference index effectively quantifies whether centroparietal responses to ei ther pulse 

modulate the relative weight on choice of each of the pulses. A positive index indicates a 

relative increase of P1 weight on choice, whereas a negative index indicates a relative increase 

of P2 weight on choice. Black dashed lines correspond to the difference in regression 

coefficients for the [P1coh*CPP – P2coh*CPP modulations]. B. Standardized regression 

coefficients (±SEM) resulting from Eq. 10 for alpha aligned to pulse 1 ( left ) or pulse 2 ( right ), 

averaged across all gap conditions. The magnitude of occipital phasic alpha responses 

(baselined before P1) did not modulate the weight on choice of P1, and after P2 did modulate 

its weight on choice in Experiment 2 only. Black dashed lines correspond t o the difference in 

regression coefficients for the P1*alpha – P2*alpha modulations, which effectively indicate a 

change in the relative weight for P1 and P2. *Asterisks along the bottom of the panels indicate 

significant (p<0.05) effects in the test perio d [0.2 -0.8s post event]. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

57 

Figure S12. Grand -averaged (±SEM) lateralised readiness potential (LRP), computed as the 

difference in voltage between [Ipsi - Contralateral] hemispheres with respct to the correct 

response hand, and sorted by gap duration, in correct trials only. Higher LRP values in dicate 

stronger negativities over the contralateral hemisphere. Topography insets indicate the 

difference in voltage across the scalp for [Left - Right] -hand responses [ -0.1s to 0s] before 

action. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

58 

Figure S1 3. Model parameters (bound (B), low drift rate (D1), high drift rate (D2)) obtained 

using grand -averaged data (white bars) in each experiment, used for the analyses and 

simulations in the main manuscript. To assess the robustness and variability of these res ults 

across participants, we additionally fit the same model to each individual participant (N = 5000, 

blue dots). Orange bars indicate the mean (± SEM) of these individually -estimated parameters. 

The averaged parameters qualitatively recapitulate the resu lts from the model based on grand -

averaged data. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

59 

Figure S1 4. Replication of results in Figure 4, using models fit to individual participants rather 

than to the grand -averaged data. We used the individually -fit parameters (B (bound), d1 ( low 

drift rate), d2 ( high drift rate)), to simulate N = 10000 for each participant. Data shown here 

represent the average of all simulations across participants, and error bars indicate the Standard 

Error of the Mean (SEM). These simulations of individual data fits closely match the results 

obtained using the model fit to the grand -averaged data. A. Grand -averaged simulated ( solid 

lines ) accuracy in single - (left ) and two -pulse ( right ) trials, sorted by pulse coherence and gap 

duration in experiments 1 ( top ) and 2 ( bottom ). Observed data are overlaid ( dashed ) for 

comparison. B. Proportion (mean ± SEM) of simulated two -pulse trials that hit a bound during 

the first pulse, and therefore did not use the second pulse evidence to make a choice. C. 

Absolute value (mean ± SEM) of the decision variable (DV) at the end of pulse 1 in the subset 

of trials where the bound was not hit during that pulse, sorted by condition. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

60 

Supplementary Note 1 

We explored alternative models that could explain both the key behavioural and neural patterns 

of results in our dataset, and compared both the fit quality to accuracy data and the predicted 

EEG results to our original implementation. All models were fit t o the grand -averaged accuracy 

data for all conditions, using 10K simulations, and for both experiments separately (as was 

done for the bounded model presented in the manuscript). For EEG simulations in unbounded 

models, we assumed that the CPP signal fell back down to zero upon the dots turning blue, as 

for the simulations in the main manuscript. Fig. S1 5 below illustrates the fit quality as measured 

by means of Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). 

Fig. S15. Model comparison. A -B. Absolute (A) Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) for 

each model, or relative (B) to the bound -only model presented in the original paper . The 

compared models include the original bounded model implementation in the manuscript (Bnd); 

an equally complex model with no bound and a P2 drift rate scaling parameter (DR P2 ); a model 

with no bound, but a parameter that scaled P2 drift rates inversely to P1 coherence (invDR P2 ); 

an extension of the original model containing both a bound and a P2 drift rate scaling parameter 

that systematically downweighted P2 evidence (B + DR P2 ) or downweighted P2 evidence in a 

manner inversely proportional to P1 coherence (B + invDR P2 ). 

1.  Unbounded model + P1 -independent P2 drift rate reweighting ( DR P2 )

First, we fit a model with no bound in which the drift rate for P2 was estimated by 

reweighting (positive or negative) the P1 drift rate via an additional free scaling parameter w.

This model thus had the same complexity as our original one (k = 3 free parameters): two drift 

rate parameters for high and low coherence of P1 ( dhigh , dlow ), plus a scaling parameter, w,

dictating the strength of P2 relative to same -coherence P1. The drift rate for P2 (d P2 ) was 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

61 

computed as the d*w, where d equals d high or d low depending on P2 coherence, multiplied by 

the scaling parameter w, so that if w < 1, P2 drift rates would decrease compared to the same 

coherence in P1. 

This first model (DR P2 ) yielded a similar fit quality to the data compared to our original 

bounded model (Bnd), as measured by BIC ( Fig. S15 ). The new model broadly recapitulated 

the key behavioural results, including order effects, ( Fig. S16,A ) and could also recapitulate 

the generally lower CPP -P2 amplitudes ( Fig. S16,B ). However, this model failed to capture the 

key coherence -based pattern observed in the CPP -P2 data. Namely, while our EEG results 

showed that CPP -P2 in trials following P1 -low coherence pulses reached overall higher 

amplitudes than that in trials followi ng P1 -high coherence pulses (see Fig. 3), this model’s 

simulations predicted that CPP -P2 should scale only with P2 coherence, showing higher 

amplitudes and steeper build —up rates for P2 -high trials, regardless of P1 coherence ( Fig. S16, 

C). This is at odds with our empirical results. 

Fig. S16. Simulation results (N = 10K) of a model with no bound, and a free parameter that 

systematically reweighted P2 drift rates relative to P1. A. Observed ( dashed ) and simulated 

(solid ) proportion of correct responses . B. Simulated CPP -P1 traces, sorted by P1 coherence. 

C. Simulated CPP -P2 coherences, sorted by P1 and P2 coherence. Bar graph insets indicate 

average CPP -P2 amplitude [0 -0.2s after P2] for visualisation purposes. High -coherence P2 

trials are predicted to reach higher amplitudes than low -coherence P2 ones, irre spective of P1 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

62 

coherence. Bar graph insets indicate average CPP -P2 amplitude [0 -0.2s after P2]. This is at 

odds with our empirical findings (c.f. Fig. 3 in manuscript). 

2.  Unbounded model + P1 -dependent P2 Drift rate reweighting (invDRP2) 

Next, we tested a model in which P2 downweighting could depend on P1 strength. That is, we 

made the P2 drift rate scaling parameter w inversely proportional to P1 coherence so that P2 

drift rate d P2 = d*w/d P1 , where d equals d high or d low depending on P2 coherence, and d P1 

indicates the preceding P1 coherence. This implements a kind of certainty weighting, whereby 

evidence following a strong P1 is more strongly dampened than evidence following a weak P1. 

This model could recapitulate the key behavioural findings ( Fig. S17,A ), and also qualitatively 

captured the CPP -P2 effects (i.e. P1 -low trials reaching overall higher amplitudes than P1 -high 

trials, Fig. S17,C ), although the magnitude of this effect was substantially smaller than 

predicted by the original simple bounded model with no drift rate modulations. However, BICs 

indicated that this model provided an overall worse fit to the accuracy data compared to th e

original bounded model ( Fig. S15 ). 

Fig. S17. Simulation results (N = 10K) of a model with no bound, and a free parameter that 

scaled P2 drift rates in a manner inversely proportional to P1 coherence. A. Observed ( dashed )

and simulated ( solid ) proportion of correct responses . B. Simulated CPP -P1 traces, sorted by 

P1 coherence. C. Simulated CPP -P2 traces, sorted by P1 and P2 coherence. Bar graph insets 

indicate average CPP -P2 amplitude [0 -0.2s after P2] for visualisation purposes. CPP -P2 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

63 

amplitudes scaled with both P1 and P2 coherences , in line with our empirical findings, though 

the fit to behaviour was compromised (see BICs in Fig S15). 

3.  Bounded models + P2 drift rate reweighting ( Bnd + DR P2, , Bnd+ invDR P2 )

Finally, we investigated how well models with both a bound and either of the two P2 drift rate 

scaling methods we investigated above (uniform downweighting, P1 -dependent 

downweighting) could capture the data, thus effectively testing two extensions of our original 

implementation that allowed for flexible reweighting of P2. 

The uniform downweighting model with a bound (Bnd + DR P2 ) could recapitulate all key 

behavioural and EEG findings ( Fig. S18 , but the additional complexity of the model was not 

supported by BIC ( Fig. S15 ). Crucially, the reason that this model could recapitulate the CPP -

P2 results was still the presence of a bound, although we note that the proportion of trials that 

were predicted to terminate early was reduced in this model compared to the original bound ed 

model presented in the manuscript (c.f. Fig. 4). Yet, this relatively small fraction of trials where 

accumulation ended early meant that 1) in some trials no accumulation was allowed to occur 

at all during P2, and 2) where it occurred, the DV was closer to bound following P1 -high 

coherence trials, thus needing to accumulate less further evidence before reaching a bound and 

yielding smaller CPP -P2 amplitudes overall in those trials. The inclusion of a bound was thus 

key to allow a model with uniform P2 downweighting to account for both behavioural and EEG 

data. 

The model with P1 -based scaling of P2 drift rates with a bound could also recapitulate all key 

behavioural and EEG findings ( Fig. S19 ), but again, the additional complexity of the model 

was not supported by BICs ( Fig. S15 ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

64 

Fig. S18 . Simulation results (N = 10K) of an extension of our original model with a bound, two 

drift rates, and an additional free parameter that systematically scales P2 drift rates (Bnd + 

DR P2 ), irrespective of P1 coherence. This model could recapitulate all key behavioural and 

EEG findings. A. Observed ( dashed ) and simulated ( solid ) proportion of correct responses . B. 

Model -estimated proportion of trials that terminated during pulse 1. C. Estimated absolute 

value of the decision variable at the end of P1, if no bound was hit. D-F. Model -based CPP 

simulations sorted by gap duration ( D), P1 coherence and aligned to P1 ( E), or P1 -P2 coherence 

and aligned to P2 ( F). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

65 

Fig. S19 Simulation results (N = 10K) of an extension of our original model with a bound, two 

drift rates, and an additional free parameter w that inversely scales P2 drift rates with P1 

coherence (Bnd + invDR P2 ), so that dP2 = d*w/dP1 . This model could recapitulate all key 

behavioural and EEG findings. A. Observed and simulated proportion of correct responses. B. 

Model -estimated proportion of trials that terminated during pulse 1. C. Estimated absolute 

value of the decision variable at the end of P1, if no bound was hit. D-F. Model -based CPP 

simulations sorted by gap duration ( D), p1 coherence and aligned to P1 ( E), or P1 -P2 coherence 

and aligned to P2 ( F). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.30.651428 doi: bioRxiv preprint

66 

Conclusion 

This extended modelling exercise suggests that 1) a simple bounded model is favoured by 

model comparison, 2) an alternative model of equal complexity which includes a P1 -dependent 

systematic downweighting of P2 rather than a bound can produce qualitatively similar results, 

the common feature of both viable models being the push -pull relationship between P1 and P2, 

and 3) more complex models including both a bound and P2 modulations can also account for 

bot h the behavioural and EEG results, but the additional complexity is not supported by the 

current data. While it is possible that some flexible weight modulations occur, these are not 

sufficiently influential to justify its inclusion in the model. Future wo rk would nevertheless be 

warranted to explore this possibility in more detail using tailored task paradigms.