Title: 3558988

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227v1.full.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 21:18:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 49

Markdown Content:
1

## A Dual -Ensemble Model of Infralimbic Cortex Function 

## in Behavioural Flexibility 

Avi Adlakha 1, Ivo Sonntag 1, Simone Pfarr 2, Janet Barroso -Flores 2, Wolfgang Sommer 2,$ , Thomas 

Kuner 1,$ 

> 1

Dept. of Functional Neuroanatomy, Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Heidelberg University, 

69120, Germany  

> 2

Institute of Psychopharmacology, Central Institute of Mental Health (ZI), J 5, 68159 Mannheim  

> $

Equal contribution 

Corresponding author:  Avi.Adlakha@uni -heidelberg.de 

# Abstract 

The infralimbic cortex (IL) has been described as both facilitator and terminator of reward -seeking, 

yet both functions appear mutually exclusive. We reconcile this discrepancy by proposing a dual -

ensemble model: one for action -outcome predict ion and another for prediction correction . Using 

longitudinal miniscope imaging in rats, we show that during training, the action -outcome predictor 

ensemble sharpens its activity by suppressing the majority of the IL neuronal population. As 

contingencies stabilize, entropy decreases, reflecting a refined predictive model. During extinction, 

the prediction correction ensemble activates in response to reward omission. A computational 

simulation based on these two ensembles successfully recapitulated our experimental results. This 

framework reconciles conflicting models, where IL manipulation can either accelerate or ab olish 

extinction by demonstrating that IL activity dynamically encodes predictive accuracy. Our findings 

indicate that IL functions as an action -outcome predictor that elegantly guides behavioural flexibility. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

# Introduction 

Adaptive behaviour depends on the ability to predict the consequences of actions and to update 

these predictions when environmental contingencies change. The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) 

plays a central role in this process, integrating motivational, co ntextual, and action -related 

information to guide flexible decision -making 1. The functional landscape of the infralimbic (IL) cortex 

has historically been defined by its role in fear extinction, particularly through foundational studies 

from the Quirk laboratory 2–10 . These early ablation and lesion studies established the IL as an 

essential " STOP " region for behaviour, demonstrating that while the IL is not required to learn a fear 

task, it is critical for suppressing freezing behaviour. Consequently, the region was long viewed as a 

dedicated inhibitory switch. However, this model failed to explai n findings in drug and food seeking 

behaviours. While some findings supported an extinction role, others revealed that IL inhibition 

slowed the acquisition of self -administration, suggesting a facilitatory function 11 –17 . Theories 

attempting to bridge this gap, formulating context differences or movement -based similarities, could 

not reconcile this discrepancy 18 –22 . The IL cortex is also deeply involved in habit formation, 

specifically the transition from goal directed actions to stimulus response patterns 23 –25 . This 

introduces a functional paradox; if the IL is necessary for habit formation, its removal should 

theoretically accelerate extinction by preventing habit repetition, yet the opposite occurs. 

A key challenge in interpreting these findings is that the functional contribution of the IL appears 

highly context dependent . Experimental manipulations of IL activity have yielded opposing 

behavioural outcomes, with disruption either impairing extinction or enhancing reward seeking 

depending on task and timing 14,26 –28 , suggesting that IL function cannot be adequately described as 

a unitary process. Instead, it raises the possibility that distinct neuronal subpopulations within the IL 

support different, potentially opposing computations, whose relative engagement depends on 

behavioural demands 22 . Recent studies have begun to identify specific ensembles corresponding to 

these distinct functions, demonstrating that targeted manipulations of these assemblies can 

selectively impair one behavioural facet while leaving others intact 17,29 .

From a computational perspective, this apparent functional duality is reminiscent of frameworks in 

which cortical circuits encode both predictions about action outcomes and deviations from those 

predictions. In particular, models of medial prefrontal funct ion propose that neural populations 

represent expected outcomes while parallel populations signal prediction corrections that drive 

behavioural updating 30,31 . Such architectures provide a mechanism for balancing behavioural 

persistence with flexibility, yet their relevance to IL function during appetitive learning has not been 

directly tested. 

Here, we propose that the IL implements a dual -ensemble architecture comprising (i) an action –

outcome predictor ensemble , which encodes expected consequences of behaviour, and (ii) a 

prediction correction ensemble , which is recruited when outcomes deviate from expectation. Under 

this framework, several key observations arise as necessary consequences of its operation including 

the sparse population of responding neurons 26,29 and decreasing neural recruitment by repeated 

actions and habit formation 23,25,32 . Most importantly , the high activity levels and necess ar y

contribution of the IL cortex during extinction 6,33 are revealed to be an inherent by -product of the 

framework’s underlying mechani sms . This hypothesis offers a unifying account that reconciles 

previously conflicting findings by linking IL activity to predictive dual -ensemble model .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

To test this, we performed longitudinal calcium imaging of neuronal populations in the IL cortex of 

freely behaving rats using head -mounted miniscopes during a cue -conditioned operant task 

encompassing acquisition, extinction and reinstatement. This approa ch enables tracking of single 

neurons and population dynamics across task conditions with high temporal resolution 34 . We find 

that IL activity is organized into dynamically evolving ensembles that are not rigidly tied to specific 

behavioural events but instead exhibit flexible temporal tuning across trials. As learning progresses, 

population activity becomes increasingly structured, reflected in a robust decrease in Shannon’s 

entropy both within and across sessions. Entropy reduction indicates a transition from exploratory, 

high -variability dynamics to more stable, predictive representations. Concomitantly, ensemble 

structure reveals stable core populations embedded within more dynamic neuronal assemblies, 

consistent with the emergence of refined internal models of task contingencies. 

# Results 

## Rats learn and adapt reward -seeking strategies across self -administration, 

## extinction, and reinstatement 

To examine how behavioural strategies and outcome expectations evolve across self -administration, 

extinction, and reinstatement, rats were equipped with head -mounted miniscopes to record 

neuronal activity in the infralimbic cortex (IL) and subsequently tra ined in a cue -conditioned self -

administration task (Fig. 1A; Supplementary Fig. 1A-C). Recordings throughout the self -

administration phase could be obtained from five rats, of which three also completed the extinction 

and reinstatement task conditions . During self -administration, rats rapidly acquired the task, 

exhibiting a strong preference for the active lever (6 8.9 ± 8.4 presses/session) over the inactive lever 

(2.2 ± 0.5 presses/session , p=6.6e -10), indicating robust action –outcome learning ( Fig. 1B ;

Supplementary Fig. 1D ). Lever pressing initially increased across sessions and subsequently 

declined, consistent with the incorporation of task structure, including reward delivery and timeout 

intervals. Following removal of both cue and reward, active lever pressing decreased markedly during 

extinction (8. 4 ± 2.0 presses/session; p=0.016 ), indicating suppression of the learned behaviour. In 

the reinstatement task condition , reintroduction of the cue without reward led to a significant 

recovery of responding (13. 7 ± 2.7 presses/session; p=0.005 ), although behaviour remained below 

self -administration levels (Fig. 1B; Supplementary Fig. 1D ). 

To quantify reward expectation independently of lever pressing, we analysed head -entry behaviour 

following trial initiation. During self -administration, rats performed a head entry following 9 3% of 

lever presses, reflecting a high expectation of reward availability ( Fig. 1C ; Supplementary Fig. 1E ). 

This probability decreased to 5 7% during extinction ( p=3.5e -05 vs Self -administration ), indicating 

reduced expectation in the absence of predictive cues. Notably, reinstatement restored this measure 

to 76.2 % ( p=0.0 49 vs Extinction ), demonstrating that the cue alone is sufficient to (partially) reinstate 

reward expectation despite continued reward omission. Consistent with this interpretation, the inter -

trial interval (ITI) increased substantially during extinction (49.6 ± 19.8 s vs 16.2 ± 5.5 s during self -

administration; p= 0.0058 ), reflecting reduced motivation for the task. During reinstatement, ITIs 

decreased to 23.9 ± 15.8 s, indicating partial recovery of task engagement ( Fig. 1D ; Supplementary 

Fig. 1F ), although this effect did not reach significance relative to other task conditions (p = 0.06 vs 

extinction, and 0.72 vs self -administration) .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

In contrast, the latency between lever press and head entry remained stable across all task 

conditions (~ 700 ms; p = 0.82; Fig. 1E ; Supplementary Fig. 1G ), suggesting that the motor sequence 

linking action and outcome evaluation is highly automat ed and insensitive to changes in reward 

contingency. However, the number and cumulative duration of head entries per session was 

significantly modulated by task condition (56.6 ± 10.9 s, 133.52 ± 20.6 s during self -administration, 

4 ± 0.4 s, 3.45 ± 1.6 s during extinction, and 11.8 ± 3.4 s, 16.2 ± 5.9 s during reinstatement , with p = 

2.38e -07 and 1.90e -19 respectively ), reflecting adaptive adjustment to expected reward availability 

(Supplementary Fig.1 H-K).

Together, these results demonstrate that the behavioural paradigm induces robust learning and 

adaptive modification of reward -seeking strategies. Cue -induced reinstatement restores reward 

expectation and task engagement, as reflected by increased outcome c hecking and reduced inter -

trial intervals. The distinct behavioural features provide a framework for probing how IL neuronal 

ensembles encode distinct components of action –outcome representations and their dynamic 

updating across task conditions. 

## In -vivo calcium imaging reveals behaviourally aligned IL neuronal activity 

To illustrate the quality and structure of the recorded neuronal activity, we present representative 

calcium imaging data from a single animal’s first session (Rat 1, Self -Admin. 01). Maximum intensity 

projections (MIPs) of raw and processed recordings dem onstrate the extraction of neuronal signals 

and the identification of individual somata following pre -processing (Fig. 2 A, B) . Spatial footprints of 

identified neurons are shown in Fig. 2C , and histological verification confirmed accurate GRIN lens 

placement and viral expression within the infralimbic cortex (Fig. 2D) . The spatial (Fig . 2C) and 

temporal (Fig . 2E) footprints of five randomly selected neurons are highlighted in blue and with 

arrows to illustrate representative activity. The analysis pipeline yielded high -quality signals with a 

high signal -to -noise ratio, demonstrating effective separation of neuronal activity from background 

and motion artifacts. These calcium transients exhibited characteristic kinetics, defined by a rapid 

onset followed by a slow decay phase lasting several seconds and pronounced event -related 

transients, illustrating the diversity of response profiles within the recorded population (Fig. 2F ).

Importantly, these examples are representative of the broader dataset and serve to qualitatively 

demonstrate the presence of behaviourally aligned neuronal activity in IL ensembles. A systematic 

and quantitative analysis of trial -related tuning and populat ion dynamics across animals and 

sessions is presented in the following section. 

## Sparse and temporally structured IL activity is dominated by t rial -related 

## suppression 

To characterize how IL neurons encode trial -related events, we quantified calcium activity in a peri -

event window spanning −5 s to +5 s around the lever press. Neuronal activity was compared against 

a bootstrapped baseline to determine significant modulati on (See Methods). Notably, some IL 

neurons exhibited highly tuned responses, with their activity largely confined to specific peri -event 

periods. A representative example is shown in Fig. 3A , where trial -by -trial heatmaps ( Fig. 3A1 ) and 

the corresponding mean response ( Fig. 3A2 ) reveal a reliable, temporally confined activation pattern 

aligned to the behavioural sequence. These tuned responses were individualistic and confined to 

specific parts of the task for each neuron during the acquisition of the task. Figure 3B further 

illustrates this with three distinct examples: one with peak activity preceding the lever press, another 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

peaking after the lever press but before head entry, and a third activating after head entry. The 

neurons activity modulation was not just limited to being excited, but they also showed suppression 

correlating with the lever press. An example of a neuron exhibiting significant suppression is shown 

in Fig. 3C . The percentage of suppressed neurons during self -administration and extinction (4 1.0 %, 

34. 2%) was found to be significantly higher than that of activated neurons (7. 4%, 6.8 %; p= 0.0001 for 

both) . However, the percentage of activated neurons went up significantly during the reinstatement 

sessions ( 21.3%, p=0.006), although the percentage of suppressed neurons remained stable ( 32.4%, 

p=0.81) (Fig. 3D ) Th e increase d percentage of activated reinstatement neurons, motivated us to look 

into the ensembles that appear during the different session types, and their activity signatures. This 

imbalance indicat es that trial -related suppression is a stable and prominent feature of IL population 

dynamics with a higher recruitment of activated neurons during reinstatement .

Together, these findings indicate that IL ensemble activity during goal -directed behaviour is 

characterized by sparse and temporally structured excitation embedded within widespread 

suppression. This pattern suggests that task -relevant information is encod ed by a small subset of 

selectively active neurons against a background of reduced population activity, consistent with a 

high signal -to -noise coding regime. Such an organization is compatible with computational 

frameworks in which predictive representatio ns are sharpened through selective activation and 

concurrent suppression of non -informative activity 35,36 .

## Structured IL population dynamics differentiate behavioural contingencies 

Analysis of z -score normalized population activity surrounding the lever press revealed distinct, 

phase -specific temporal profiles within the IL. To isolate core computational signals, we refined the 

analysis by excluding neurons that showed no significant modulation from baseline and labelled the 

remaining neurons as “tuned neurons”. We further divided these tuned neurons into significantly 

activat ed and significantly suppressed neuronal subsets. 

During self -administration, average neuronal activity gradually decreased leading up to the lever 

press, forming a trough at the moment of the action (-0.76z, 50ms after LP ), followed by a sharp, 

transient post -press returning to baseline ( Fig . 4A1 ). While tuned neurons exhibited a similar 

trajectory, they were characterized by a shallower LP trough (-0.86z, at the LP ) and higher post -press 

activity (0.22z, after 1.45s of lever press) (Fig . 4A2 ). These dynamics were driven by a robust 

contribution from activated neurons having an increased activity after the lever press (0.86z, 1.55s 

after LP ) (Fig . 4A3 ) and a more sustained muted response from suppressed neurons ( -0.82z , from LP 

to 3.85s after LP) (Fig. 4A4 ), potentially reflecting a neuronal signal that builds anticipation or motor 

preparation followed by a representation of the action's execution or consequence. 

In contrast, the extinction task condition was characterized by a marked shift in the IL activity profile. 

Population traces revealed a prominent peak (0.5z, 1.15s before LP ) approximately 1 second prior to 

the LP, followed by a sustained decrease ( -0.7z) neurons for up to 2 seconds post -press ( Figure 4B1 ). 

This profile was mirrored in the tuned neuron population ( Fig. 4B2 ), where the pre -emptive activation 

was driven by a surge in firing from activated cells (1.2z, 1s before LP) (Fig. 4B3 ) alongside a relative 

sustained suppression from suppressed cells (-0.5z, from LP to 3.5s after LP) (Fig. 4B4 ). This pre -

emptive firing likely signifies the recruitment of an inhibitory process to suppress the previously 

learned response, while the subsequent prolonged inhibition reinforces the updated non -reward 

contingency. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

The reinstatement phase displayed an activity profile largely consistent with initial learning, 

characterized by a pre -press decrease (-0.65z at LP) (Figure 4C1 -2). A key difference, however, was a 

substantial, delayed increase in activity during the expected reward window (0.88z, 3s after LP) .

Further analysis revealed that this unique activity distinct from the self -administration profile was 

driven primarily by an ensemble of neurons recruited during both extinction and reinstatement 

(Supplementary Fig. 2). While these neurons showed high pre -press activity during extinction, they 

transitioned to a bimodal pattern during reinstatement, firing both before the lever press and during 

the expected reward window. This suggests these neurons may encode a predict ion correction 

signal, potentially serving as a 'STOP' command to suppress the conditioned response. Furthermore, 

the pre -press firing of this subpopulation explains the altered geometry of the reinstatement profile, 

specifically the narrower and right -shifted appearance of the activity trough. It is also due to this 

additi ve effect of neurons activating immediately after a lever press, and the additional delayed 

activated neurons, we find the percentage of activated neurons significantly higher in reinstatement 

compared to other task conditions (Fig. 3D ). 

In summary, the IL cortex exhibits distinct neuronal signatures that track the evolving contingencies 

of each task condition . Self -administration is characterized by broad pre -action suppression 

followed by post -press firing that encodes the fundamental task structure. Extinction shifts th ese

dynamic s toward pre -emptive firing before the action . Finally, reinstatement represents a functional 

combination of these two states. Together, these findings position the IL as a dynamic arbiter that 

integrates motivational cues with updated correction signals which motivated us to investigate the 

dynamics, and profiles of individual ensembles across the task conditions .

## Dynamic reconfiguration and stabilization of IL cortex ensembles during self -

## administration 

How does the structured condition -specific activity emerge? To examine this, we first tracked the 

activity state of individual neurons across sessions and task conditions. Fig . 5A illustrate s the spatial 

organisation of individual neurons from Rat 1 . When comparing the spatial maps, it is evident that 

the activity of individual neurons is not preserved across behavioural conditions . Neurons frequently 

transitioned between being not significantly active, suppressed, or activated across learning days. 

Some neurons were active at self -administration and re -appear in reinstatement, yet there is no 

obvious pattern of re -occurrence of individual neurons among the three task conditions . This lack of 

a stable, topographical map suggests that the IL cortex does not rely on dedicated, stable ensembles 

of neurons to encode the learned action , rather it relies on representational drift models to encode 

the outcomes . This cellular dynamism is further highlighted by the state transitions between 

sessions, as shown in the Sankey diagram (Fig . 5B).

While individual neurons were unstable across days, the overall population activity showed a clear 

pattern of stabilization within and across sessions. Early in training, the tuning of the neuronal 

population appeared noisy and chaotic, but it settled into a more consistent and stable pattern in 

later sessions ( Figure 5 C). 

To identify neuronal ensembles within this heterogeneous population, we analysed a subset of 329 

neurons from the three rats that were tracked across all three task conditions . Neurons were sorted 

hierarchically based on the session in which they first exhibited significant modulation (Fig . 5D ). This 

organization revealed distinct functional clusters: the first three rows represent ensembles 

predominantly active during self -administration, extinction, and reinstatement, respectively. The 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

remaining rows categorize neurons that were either non -responsive (Row 4) or significantly 

suppressed (Row 5). As shown in Fig . 5 D2 , grouping neurons by their longitudinal activity profiles 

clearly delineates ensembles specific to each task condition .

## Entropy reduction reveals progressive stabilization of IL population dynamics 

Neuronal dynamics were further quantified using entropy, a measure of system disorder or 

unpredictability. We found that entropy consistently decreased both across trials within a single 

session (intra -session) and across the first f our sessions of self -administration (inter -session) ( Fig .

6A , B). This decrease signifies that the neuronal ensemble activity becomes more structured, 

predictable, and refined with practice. Corroborating this, we observed that raw population activity 

showed high variance during the first 50 lever presses of a session (Figure 6C1 ), but adopted a more 

stable, characteristic curve during the subsequent 50 presses ( Figure 6C2 ). Furthermore, t he z -

scored activity of significantly activated neurons across the first four self -administration sessions 

revealed the dynamic evolution of the characteristic activity curve of the ensemble as sessions 

progress ( Fig. 6 D).

To quantify this stabilization, we performed a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the population 

activity (Supplementary Fig. 4). Population activity during the initial trials of a session is highly 

scattered , indicating high variance , as the trials progress, the data points converge and cluster 

together demonstrating a reduction in variance. This suggests the neuronal ensemble begins each 

session in a high -variability, exploratory state and then settles into a stable and more efficient 

attractor state representing the well -rehearsed action sequence. 

Together, these findings indicate that IL cortex implements a dynamic population coding strategy in 

which ensemble membership is highly flexible, while the population -level representation becomes 

progressively structured and predictable with learning. This stabilization suggests the emergence of 

an internal model of task contingencies. The dissociation between cellular instability and 

population -level stability is consistent with computational frameworks in which stable, low -

dimensional representations aris e from the dynamic recruitment of distributed neuronal 

subpopulations, enabling robust encoding despite heterogeneous single -cell activity 37,38 .

## A predictive coding modelling of IL ensemble dynamics 

To investigate a potential circuit mechanism capable of producing the observed neuronal dynamics 

in the IL cortex, we developed a computational simulation grounded in the principles of predictive 

coding and action -outcome learning 30,31 . The simulation posits the existence of two functionally 

distinct neuronal populations, hereafter referred to as Ensemble 1 (E1) and Ensemble 2 (E2) which 

together learn and update internal representations of environmental contingencies (see Methods for 

a detailed description). This minimal architecture was designed to test whether interactions between 

predictive and error correcting populations are sufficient to reproduce the principal features of the 

experimentally observed IL activity patterns. 

Ensemble 1 is conceptualized as the predictive ensemble consisting of 100 neurons with intrinsic 

temporal tuning distributed across the 10s trial window. Neuronal activity profiles were modelled 

using gamma functions parameterized to approximate the kinetics of GCaMP calcium transients. A 

Hebbian -like learning rule governs the plasticity of this ensemble: a successful prediction, where a 

neuron's temporal tuning aligns with the occurrence of a salient stimulus (i.e., cue or reward), results 

in the potentiation of its response amplitude in subsequent trials proportional to its prediction 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

accuracy. In addition, active E1 neurons exerted lateral inhibitory influences onto other E1 neurons 

proportional to their activity level, thereby promoting competitive population dynamics and sparse 

representations 36,39 .

Ensemble 2 functions as the prediction correction ensemble. Consistent with theoretical frame 

proposing prediction -correction computations within medial prefrontal cortex 30,31 ,E2 activity 

increased selectively when expected outcomes failed to occur. Importantly, E2 activity reflected 

violations of predicted outcomes rather than stimulus salience itself. The magnitude of E2 activation 

scaled proportionally with the predictive st rength generated by E1, thereby implementing a negative 

prediction -correction signal capable of suppressing outdated predictions through inhibitory 

feedback onto E1 

Fig. 7A shows the activity curves of the E1 and E2 ensembles across training, extinction, and 

reinstatement trials. During self -administration neurons within E1 whose temporal tuning aligned 

with cue or reward delivery increased their activity across trial s. Concurrently, lateral inhibition 

generated widespread suppression across the remaining neuronal population, reproducing the 

dominant inhibitory component observed experimentally during peri -event population analyses. 

Early training trials were character ized by weak predictive strength and correspondingly large positive 

prediction errors, whereas prediction errors progressively diminished as the model converged 

toward stable cue –reward representations 

During extinction , E1 initially continue to generate predictions for cue and reward delivery despite 

their omission. This mismatch produced strong negative prediction -error , hence stronger correction 

signals within E2 particularly around the expected reward period (Supplementary Fig. 5 ). Persistent 

omission of expected outcomes progressively weakened predictive activity within E1, resulting in 

reduced prediction strength across trials and the emergence of prominent pre -action activity 

patterns resembling those observed experimentally. 

During reinstatement, reintroduction of the cue restored predictive activity within E1 associated with 

cue expectation. However, because reward delivery remained absent, E2 continued to generate 

negative prediction correction signals at the expected reward time point. This produced sustained 

post -action E2 activity closely resembling the delayed reinstatement -related activity observed in the 

empirical recordings. We hypothesize that persistent E2 activation contributes to the gradual 

suppression of reinstated responding by signalling continued violation of expected reward 

outcomes. 

Importantly, the model also reproduced the progressive reduction in Shannon entropy observed 

experimentally during self -administration (Supplementary Fig. 4D) . Entropy of simulated ensemble 

activity decreased across trials as population responses became increasingly structured and 

predictable. This reduction reflects the emergence of a more stable internal predictive model and 

parallels the experimentally obser ved transition from variable early -session dynamics toward low -

variance population states. 

Together, these findings demonstrate that a minimal predictive coding architecture based on 

interactions between temporally tuned predictive neurons and error correction neurons is sufficient 

to recapitulate the principal features of IL ensemble activity observed experimentally, including 

sparse excitation, widespread suppression, entropy reduction, and condition -specific peri -event 

dynamics. The model therefore provides a parsimonious mechanistic framework linking dynamic IL 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

population activity to predictive representations of action –outcome contingencies and their 

updating during behavioural adaptation. 

## Decoding behavioural states and t ask epochs from IL e nsemble activity 

To formally assess whether the structured population dynamics observed above encode task -

relevant information, we applied supervised machine learning approaches to decode behavioural 

context and event timing from IL ensemble activity. 

We first tested whether neural population activity discriminates between task conditions. 30 Fine -

Gaussian Support Vector Machine (SVM) model s were trained to classify 10 seconds (5 seconds 

before and 5 seconds after a LP, 201 frames) of z -scored traces from the three different task 

conditions, self -administration, extinction, and reinstatement . All the models were able to classify 

the data with high accuracy (Training: 96.22%, Test: 89.55%) and showed significant differences from 

models trained on shuffled data (Accuracy: 34.39%), demonstrating that the activity of IL cortex 

shows significant di fferences between different task conditions. (p=2.8e -06, Fig 8A, B )

To understand what features the model was using for this classification , and that there is no 

overtraining , we conducted a Shapley (SHAP) analysis ( Fig . 8C). This revealed that the model's 

predictions relied heavily on specific time windows within the trial and not just single instances .

Crucially, frames just before the lever press were most important for identifying extinction trials, 

while frames approximately 3 seconds after the lever press were key for identifying reinstatement 

trials. This aligns perfectly well with our earlier findings of increased neuronal activity during these 

specific epochs, confirming that the SVM learned to leverage these biologically relevant time 

periods. 

We next investigated whether IL activity encodes the temporal occurrence of task -relevant events. 

To test this, we trained feedforward neural network (FFNN) classifiers (MATLAB fitcnet) to distinguish 

"trial" activity, defined by a fixed frame window (F) a round Lever Press (LP) events from "non -trial" 

control segments for each of the five rats . Control windows were selected using a distance -

maximization algorithm to ensure they were temporally isolated from LPs while maintaining identical 

dimensions. For each event, calcium traces from N neurons were flattened into a N x F feature vector 

and st andardized for classification. 

To ensure the reliability and generalizability of the decoder, we performed an exhaustive parameter 

search, training 4,000 model iterations across various architectures, regularization parameters, and 

preprocessing steps ( Methods ). The classification performance of all the models was robust across 

the entire parametric space . (Training Accuracy: 99.8%, Test Accuracy: 75.58% , Supplementary Fig. 

5). 

Using an ANOVA to compare model performances, we identified that a 25 -layer architecture (p = 

1.2e -07), the exclusion of PCA (p = 1.4e -17), and a 90/10% train -test split (p = 1.1e -04) yielded 

significantly higher test accuracies. While the inclusion of a r egularization parameter ( λ = 0.05) 

improved performance specifically for larger temporal windows (p = 5.7e -04), data augmentation 

was found to increase training accuracy without improving test performance (p = 0.92 ;

Supplementary Fig. 5) . To confirm that the models captured genuine biological insights rather than 

artifacts of data processing, we conducted permutation testing. Using the best -performing 

parameters, we trained 500 control models (100 permutations per rat) on shuffled labels. These 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

control models performed near chance levels, while the original models achieved significantly higher 

accuracy (81.9% vs 50%, p = 2.98e -17 , Fig 8D, Supplementary Fig 5 ). 

To identify the optimal temporal scale required to classify trial information from IL activity we 

systematically varied the input duration from 5 frames (0.25s) around an LP to 100 frames (5s) , we 

were able to train models which performed significantly above the shuffled controls for all the 

windows (p=0 , Fig 8E ). W e found that test accuracy saturated at a window of 50 frames (±2.5s) .

Finally, applying these trained models in a sliding -window approach across continuous recordings 

revealed that prediction probabilities peaked near trial events , reliably detecting the occurrences of 

the trials (Fig. 8F ). 

Together, these results demonstrate that IL population activity contains decodable signatures of both 

behavioural context and event timing. This supports the view that the progressively structured and 

low -entropy population dynamics observed during learnin g correspond to functionally meaningful 

representations that can be read out by downstream systems. 

These constraints argue for a circuit architecture in which temporally structured predictive 

representations are continuously shaped by error correction driven inhibitory feedback, supporting 

our hypothesis formalized in the dual -ensemble model described above . This shows that the models 

learned the specific ensemble activity patterns associated with the core task event. Together, these 

results highlight that IL population activity is not just randomly dynamic , but contains a rich, 

decodable structure that reliably represents both the broader behavioural context and the precise 

timing of specific actions within a task. 

# Discussion 

The infralimbic cortex (IL) has historically been interpreted either as a behavioural “STOP” system 

mediating extinction or as a facilitatory region supporting reward seeking and habit formation. Our 

findings suggest that these apparently opposing function s can be reconciled . Longitudinal calcium 

imaging across acquisition, extinction, and reinstatement show ed that IL activity is organized into 

sparse, dynamically evolving ensembles whose temporal structure is tightly linked to behavioural 

contingencies. Rather than acting as a simple inhibitory switch, the IL appears to implement 

predictive representations of action outcomes together with prediction correction -related signals 

that update these representations when contingencies change. 

Previous lesion, optogenetic, and immediate early gene studies established that distinct IL 

ensembles contribute to extinction, reward seeking, and habit -like behaviour  3,18,40 –42 . However, 

these approaches generally lacked the temporal resolution necessary to resolve how ensemble 

activity evolves during behaviour and across learning stages. Our longitudinal recordings revealed 

that only a small fraction of neurons exhibited signif icant event -related activation, whereas a 

substantially larger fraction showed suppression during task execution. This sparse coding regime 

embedded within widespread suppression resembles observations in electrophysiological studies 

of IL and orbitofronta l cortex during learned behaviour  25,41  and is consistent with theoretical 

frameworks proposing that predictive representations are sharpened through suppression of non -

informative population activity  35,36 .

Importantly, the temporal organization of these ensembles differed systematically across task 

conditions. During self -administration, population activity exhibited a pronounced decrease 

preceding the lever press followed by a transient post -action increase , consistent with a predictive 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

representation of expected outcomes. In contrast, extinction was characterized by strong pre -action 

activation followed by sustained suppression. Within our framework, this pre -action activity may 

reflect recruitment of a prediction correction ensemble that becomes engaged when expected 

outcomes fail to occur. This interpretation provides a mechanistic explanation for why IL disruption 

impairs extinction learning in many behavioural paradigms  6,33 . Rather than directly suppressing 

behaviour per se, IL activity may encode violations of predicted outcomes that drive behavioural 

updating. Reinstatement further clarified this dual functionality. Reintroduction of the cue restored 

reward expectancy and increased behavioural engagement despite continued reward omission. At 

the neural level, reinstatement partially recovered the activity struct ure observed during acquisition 

but additionally recruited a delayed post -action component associated with increased proportions 

of activated neurons. This finding may reflect the increased computational demands imposed by 

reinstatement, where previously learned contingencies become ambiguo us and require 

simultaneous maintenance of competing predictions. Such ambiguity -related recruitment is 

consistent with broader theories assigning medial prefrontal cortex a role in conflict monitoring and 

adaptive control  1,30 . In the context of addiction, this increased computational demand may be 

particularly relevant, as impaired predictive updating or excessive weighting of cue -related 

predictions could contribute to relapse vulnerability. 43 

A central finding of the present study is the dissociation between instability at the level of single 

neurons and stability at the population level. Individual neurons frequently changed their tuning 

properties across sessions, yet ensemble -level dynamics became progressively more structured 

and predictable with learning. This stabilization was accompanied by a robust reduction in Shannon 

entropy both within and across sessions, indicating convergence toward lower -dimensional 

population representations. Suc h dynamics are compatible with models in which cortical circuits 

initially explore a high -dimensional representational space before converging onto stable attractor -

like states that support efficient behavioural policies  37,38 . Notably, these observations also provide 

a potential bridge between predictive coding and classical theories of habit formation, suggesting 

that habitual behaviour may emerge from progressively compressed and stabilized predictive 

representations. From a translational perspective, the presence of functionally distinct predictive 

and error -related ensembles suggests that successful neuromodulation of cognitive flexibility may 

depend less on the targeted brain region than on the specific neuronal popu lations recruited within 

it. 

To formalize these observations, we implemented a minimal predictive coding model comprising 

temporally tuned predictive units and prediction -correction units. The model reproduced several 

core empirical findings, including sparse tuning, widespread suppression, entropy reduction, and 

condition -specific temporal dynamics. Importantly, machine learning analyses demonstrated that 

IL population activity cont ains highly decodable information about both behavioural context and 

event timing, with classifiers relying specifically on the temporally structured epochs identified 

experimentally. While these findings are consistent with predictive coding frameworks, a lternative 

interpretations based on salience encoding, action monitoring, or state -dependent inhibitory 

control cannot be excluded. The present model should therefore be viewed as a parsimonious 

computational account rather than a definitive circuit reconstruction .

Several limitations should be considered. The number of animals completing the full longitudinal 

paradigm was limited, reflecting the substantial technical challenges associated with chronic deep 

brain miniscope imaging in freely moving rats. Maintaining stable optical access across months of 

operant training, extinction, and reinstatement represents a major experimental constraint that 

currently limits throughput relative to mouse imaging approaches. N evertheless, ensemble 

dynamics were highly consistent across animals and conditions. In addition, our conclusions remain 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

correlational, and future experiments combining longitudinal imaging with ensemble -specific 

manipulations will be required to establish causal contributions of predictive and correction -related 

populations. 

Together, these findings support a reinterpretation of IL cortex function as a dynamic predictive 

system that continuously updates behavioural representations in response to changing 

contingencies. By linking sparse ensemble coding, entropy reduction, and prediction dynamics 

within a unified longitudinal framework, the present study provides a mechanistic account capable 

of reconciling previously conflicting views of infralimbic function. 

# Conclusion 

In conclusion, our findings suggest a fundamental shift in how we conceptualize the infralimbic 

cortex, moving away from the traditional view of a simple inhibitory switch toward a more nuanced 

role as a predictive engine. By identifying the specific dynam ics of dual ensembles through 

miniscope imaging, we have provided a mechanistic explanation for the previously irreconcilable 

"go" and "stop" functions. The observed reduction in entropy and the emergence of a refined 10% 

task -responsive population during acquisition align with the region's established role in habit 

formation, while the activation of pre -press correction signals provides a clear neuronal basis for the 

process of extinction. This framework not only synthesizes decades of conflicting research but also 

offers a predictive model that accurately identifies behavioural states based on real -time neuronal 

dynamics. Ultimately, the IL cortex serves as a critical node for updating behavioural strategies, 

ensuring that an organism's internal predictions remain accurately aligned with environmental 

realities. 

# Methods 

## Animals 

Wistar rats were ordered from Charles River and kept at an inverted 12 -hour dark/light cycle with 

access to food and water ad libitum. At the start of the experiments animals were 8 weeks old. All 

procedures were approved by the local animal welfare body ( Regierungspräsidium Karlsruhe, G -

221/15, In -vivo Mikroendoskopie im Gehirn von Ratten). Data from five rats was analysed, they have 

been labelled as Rat 1, Rat 2, Rat 3, Rat 4, and Rat 5 across the paper. 

## Miniature UCLA microscopes 

UCLA Miniscopes were manufactured based on the descriptions of the miniscope.org webpage. The 

CMOS imaging printed circuit boards (PCB) and the data acquisition (DAQ) PCBs were obtained from 

SierraSircuits based on the designs the developers released on th e GitHub repository (PCB and DAQ 

version 3.2 (Aharoni, 2016 ). Later additional CMOS and DAQ PCBs were bought from labmaker 

(Berlin, Germany). The housing (focus slider, main body and filter cover, all black Delrin) as well as 

the baseplates (aluminium) and the baseplate -covers (black Delrin) were manufactured by the local 

machine -workshop and were also based on the UCLA Minis cope design . Achromatic and half -ball 

lenses were bought from Edmund optics (5x15 mm achromatic lens, ID:45207; 5x12.5 mm 

achromatic lens, ID:49923; 5x7.5 mm achromatic lens, ID:45407; half ball lens 3 mm, 47269). GRIN 

lenses were bought from Inscopix . The circuit boards for connecting the emission diode and the 

coaxial cable connector were obtained from SilverCircuits (Houston, USA) and based on the designs 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

the developers released on the GitHub repository (Aharoni, 2016g). The emission LEDs and 

miscellaneous electronics and items were bought from Digikey (Thief River Falls, USA; LED Luxeon 

Rebel Blue SMD, ID: 1416 1028 1 ND; SMA Connector 50 Ohm, ID: consma01 3.062; Light Pipe clear 

3mm, ID: VLP 550 F; IC Eeprom 1Mbit 400Khz, ID: 24AA1025 I/P; shunt jumper .1”, ID: 969102 0000 

DA; IC DIP socket 8pos, ID: DILB8P 223TLF; SMA jack R/A 50 Ohm, ID: consma002). Optic filters were 

bought from Chroma (Bellows Falls, USA; excitation filter, ET470/40x 3.5x4x1mm, ID: IN0545 35; 

emission filter, ET525/50x 4x4x1mm, ID: IN054538; dichroic mirror, T495lpxr 4x6x1mm, ID: 

IN054536). Magnets for the baseplates and main bodies were purchased from KJ Magnetics 

(Pipersville, USA; 1/16" dia. x 1/32" thick, ID: D101 -N52). The housing for the DAQ boards was 3D 

printed on an Ultimaker 2 using 3 mm thick, white PLA at 100μm z -resolution (Aharoni, 2016). Two 

different laptops (Dell Inspiron 15, MacBook Pro 15, 2017) were used for the recordings. Both had 

windows 7 installed as the operating system and the recording software supp lied by the UCLA 

Miniscope team was used for calcium imaging. 

## Surgical Procedures 

## Viral injection and GRIN lens implantation 

Animals were anesthetized with Isoflurane (1.5 - 3%, Univentor 1200 - anaesthesia Unit, Univentor ,

Zejtun, Malta) and head -fixed in a Kopf Stereotaxic frame (Model 900, David Kopf Instruments, 

Tujunga, USA). A small dose of dexamethasone was injected to reduce the intracranial pressure 

(reference) . The head was shaved to expose skin and then disinfected with ethanol swabs. The skin 

was cut along the anterior -posterior axis and the connective tissue was removed using cotton swabs 

to expose the bone. Three small craniectomies were drilled using a dental drill and Fine Science Tools 

(FST, Foster City, USA) bone screws were fixed to the skull. A craniectomy (~2mmØ) was made at 

3mm AP, and 0.5mm ML to bregma. A pulled glass injection pipette was used to inject 

AAV1.Syn.GCaMP6f.WPRE.SV40 (UPenn Vector Core, Philadelphia, USA, Lot#: CS1107, titer: 

2.13*1013 GC/ml, 1:20 dilution in PBS, 500nl) at 5mm depth. 500 nl of the virus was then slowly 

injected at the speed of 100 nl/min. Before the insertion of the GRIN lens, a glass fiber (Ø 127μm) 

was slowly lowered upto the depth of 4.4 mm from the surface of the skull to create a path for the 

GRIN lens. The GRIN lens (1 mm x 9 mm, Inscopix, Palo Alto) was lowered to the depth of 4.7 mm into 

the brain. A modified Luigs&Neumann linear actuator was used to lower the injection needle, glass 

fiber , and the GRIN lens into the brain. The linear actuator repeatedly lowered the object 300 μm 

below and then raised the object 200 μm above to alleviate pressure. The alternation rate was 

changed to lowering of 30 μm followed by raises of 20 μm, as the objected reached 1 mm from the 

target site. After the insertion of the GRIN lens, it was fixed using a layer of OptiBond ™ FL Kit (Kerr, 

Bioggio, Switzerland) followed by dental cement liquid (Paladur , Henry Schein, Gallin, Germany) and 

black dental powder (Contemporary Ortho -Jet ™, black, Lang Dental, Wheeling USA). 

## Baseplate Implantation 

Baseplates for the UCLA miniscope system were equipped with magnets and a set screw to allow a 

tight connection to the miniaturized epifluorescence microscopes. Before the microscope was 

attached to the stereotax, the focus was centered to its mid -range to allow adjustments in both 

directions after the fixation of the baseplate. Animals were anesthetized with isofluorane (1.5 – 3%, 

Univentor 1200, anaesthesia Unit, Univentor, Zejtun, Malta) and head -fixed in a stereotaxic alignment 

system (Kopf Stereotax, model 900, Tujunga, USA). The protective cement cover of the implanted 

GRIN lens was carefully removed usin g a dental drill and the lens paper in the cement cavity was 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

carefully removed with forceps. Care has to be taken to avoid scratching the surface of the GRIN lens. 

After the surrounding cement was drilled down to the level of the lens and all the lens paper was 

removed, the lens was cleaned with lens paper and ethanol. Care was taken to 23 remove all 

remaini ng vacuum grease. In case of contaminations of the lens with dental cement, acetone was 

used to dissolve the cement and clean the surface of the lens. Care has to be taken to not put 

acetone in contact with the wound or the skin of the animal. Once the lens was clean and could be 

reached with the objective GRIN lens, the miniaturized microscope, attached to the stereotaxic 

frame by a custom built holder, with the attached baseplate was lowered down to the implanted 

GRIN lens. The miniaturized microscope was attached to a PC running Windows 7 (Dell, Inspiron 15) 

through the DAQ board and the software supplied by the developers (Aharoni, 2016f) was running to 

provide visual feedback on the field of view (FOV) of the microscope. Once the GRIN lens was within 

the focal distance of the microscope the imaging parameters were initially adjusted to optimize the 

range of the histogram and facilitate the pro cess of focusing. The image repetition rate was generally 

set to 20 Hz (corresponding to exposure times of approximately 50 ms per frame), except for cases 

of weak calcium signals. The gain was always set to the maximum value and the LED power was 

adjusted until the background was visible, but no over -saturation occurred. Because of the 

anaesthesia, it was rarely possible to see calcium transients of individual cells. To find an appropriate 

field of view for the recordings, th e bottom of the GRIN lens was brought into focus (close to the top 

of the GRIN lens). From there the microscope was raised until no more scarring on the bottom of the 

lens was visible, but there were still blood vessels in focus. If a satisfying focal plan e was identified, 

dental cement liquid ( Paladur , Kulzer Mitsui Chemicals Group, Hanau, Germany) and black dental 

powder (Contemporary Ortho -Jet ™, black, Lang Dental, Wheeling USA) were mixed and the four 

corners of the baseplate were attached to the implant with the fresh cement. Care was taken to avoid 

using cement that was too liquid to avoid the cement ‘running’ below the baseplate and covering the 

lenses. After the four corners of the baseplate were attached to the implant, the remaining sides were 

covered in cement. To avoid detachment of the alumi nium baseplates from the cement, super glue 

(Pattex, flüssig, Düsseldorf, Germany) was carefully applied to the edges between the aluminium 

baseplates and the dental cement. Care was taken to avoid getting super glue between the baseplate 

and the microscope to avoid permanent attachment of the two. A fter the baseplate was cemented 

in place, the microscope set screw was carefully opened and the microscope could be carefully 

removed. The baseplate was then covered with a baseplate cover (Aharoni, 2016g) (UCLA, 

Zentralbereich Neuenheimer Feld, machine shop) to protect the lens from dirt. 

## Behavioural procedures 

## Operant self -administration hardware 

All experiments were performed in operant chambers (MED Associates chamber, ID: MED -008 - CT -

B4) enclosed in ventilated sound -attenuating cubicles. The chambers were equipped with a 

response lever on each side of the chamber. Responses at the appropriate le ver activated a dipper 

cup in which the reward was presented inside of a head entry port. A light stimulus was placed above 

the active response lever of the self -administration chamber. An IBM -compatible computer 

controlled the delivery of fluids, presentation of stimuli, and data recording. TTL pulses from the 

operant chamber for the levers and head entry ports on both sides, as well as the cue light for the 

rewarded side were acquired/digitized using an Arduino Mega running the Firmata (Firmata , 2015) 

firmware, along with the frame trigger of the DAQ board of the miniaturized microscope. The data that 

was received by the Arduino was then saved using Bonsai (Lopes et al., 2015) as .csv file. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

The conditioning chamber was 3D modelled in Blender 2.9. 

## Operant conditioning 

Self -Administration 

Saccharin self -administration training and testing sessions were performed 3 h after beginning of the 

dark phase, 5 –6 days per week. Animals were trained to self -administer 0.2% (w/v) saccharin in daily 

30 min sessions on a fixed -ratio 1 schedule using a s accharin fading procedure modified from 

Samson, Pfeffer, & Tolliver, 1988 .44 During the first 3 days of training, the animals were kept water 

deprived for 20 hours per day. Responses at the active lever were reinforced by the delivery of 0.2% 

(w/v) saccharin solution. For the remaining experiments the animals underwent the same procedure 

without water deprivation. Responses at the inactive lever were recorded but had no consequences. 

A (visual) cue was used for conditioning. The discrete visual stimulus was presented after correct 

responses resulting in saccharin delivery ( active lever). As visual stimulus, a 5 s blinking light was 

used, which was activated after a response at the active lever and was therefore directly connected 

to saccharin availability. The 5 s period served as a “time out”, during which responses were 

recorded , but did not lead to an additional reward delivery (conditioned stimulus, 1st 1.5s, 2nd 1s, 

3rd 1s; 1s off in between pulses). For the stimulus -conditioning training, the animals had to complete 

10 sessions of 30 minutes, with the conditioned stimulus (CS ), without simultaneous calcium 

imaging, and after baseplate fixation enough sessions to reach previous lever response levels with 

simultaneous calcium imaging. A Med Associates Super Port Input module (ID: DIG -712) was used 

to relay TTL pulses indicating behaviourally relevant events in the chamber (lever press left/ right ,

head entry left/right, cue 25 light left/right). Upon pressing the rewarded lever (always the right side), 

the dipper cup was placed in the liquid and the reward was presented in the head entry port. The pre -

training was done by Simone Pfarr, Janet Barro so -Flores, Laura Schaaf , and Rebecca Hoffmann. 

Extinction 

After successful completion of the stimulus conditioning phase all animals underwent 4 daily, 30 

min extinction sessions, which was sufficient to reach an extinction criterion of 25% of the baseline 

activity at the active lever per session. During extinction sessions, both levers were extended. 

Responses at the previously active lever activated the dipper cup, which did not result in reward 

delivery or presentation of the discrete CS (blinking light). The TTL -pulse was still transmitted to aid 

the post -hoc an alysis. 

Cue -induced reinstatement 

For the cue -induced reinstatement sessions, both levers were extended during the sessions and the 

animals were presented with the same conditioned stimuli (CS) as during the conditioning phase. 

after pressing the rewarded lever. The dipper cup would move; however, no reward was presented in 

the head -entry port. 

## Histology 

The animals were deeply anaesthetized with isoflurane and transcardially perfused with 100 ml 

1xPBS (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 8 mM Na2HPO4, 1.46 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4), containing 10000 

units of Heparin sodium/l. Next, the animals were perfused with 50 ml of 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) 

in 1xPBS solution (pH 7.4). The complete heads of the animals were post fixed in fixative solution for 

at least 7 days at 4 °C. After removal from the skull, brains were stored in 4 °C PBS. Perfusions were 

performed by Simone Pfarr and Janet Barroso -Flores. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

## Thin sectioning and mounting 

After at least one week of incubation in fixation solution at 4 °C the brains were dissected from the 

skulls. The GRIN lenses were removed along with the top of the skull before dissection. Care was 

taken to avoid damaging the tissue with the implanted GRI N lenses. After the dissection the 26 brains 

were rinsed 2x in fresh PBS. Then the brains were cut in half along the anterior -posterior axis to 

separate the hemispheres. The side which contained the GRIN lens was then cut a second time 

approximately 3 mm p osterior to the entry site of the GRIN lens and the anterior half was mounted in 

a vibratome Slicer (Leica VT1000S) and cut into 100 μm thick sections. The sections were collected 

in 24 well plates containing PBS with DAPI (#D9542 -10MG, final concentration 0.05 -0.1 mg/ml, 

Sigma -Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). Those slices close to the area which contained the GRIN lens were 

mounted on 24 mm x 70 mm glass specimen slides (Marienfeld, LaudaKönigshofen, Germany), 

covered with SlowFade (#S36936, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusets) and a 

coverslip (24 mm x 60 mm, Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) and then sealed with nail polish. 

## Image acquisition of fixed tissue sections 

Overview images were acquired using a Leica DM6000 upright, fluorescence microscope, equipped 

with a 1.25X/0.04 NA (Leica Microsystems, #11506215) and a 10X/0.4 NA (Leica Microsystems, 

#11506284) objective, and using the LasX acquisition software. The emission light -path contained 

an additional magnification step of 1.2x to account for the size of the camera. High -resolution close -

up images were acquired using a Leica SP8 confocal microscope, equipped with a 10X/0.4NA (Leica 

Microsystems, #11506293) objective, using the same software. The image resolution was kept at 

1024x1024 pixels, while the scan speed was set to 200 Hz with solely unidirectional scanning. All 

fluorophores were imaged sequentially. Image processing was perfo rmed using Fiji (Rueden et al., 

2017). 

## Analysis 

## Analysis of operant conditioning data 

The operant conditioning setup provided six data streams which were collected from Bonsai , namely 

cue -light, right and left levers, right and left head entry ports, and miniscope frame trigger. The TTL 

data from these streams was arranged in structures in MATLAB, and then analysed and plotted using 

MATLAB. 

## Calcium imaging data extraction 

The raw videos were analysed Mini an 45 . The analysis was carried out on the Baden -Wüttemburg High 

Performance Cluster (bw -HPC) and on a local PC. The Xarray files from Minian were expor td into a 

combined ncdf (.nc) database after which they were imported into MATLAB, and arranged into 

structures to carry out further analysis. Minian analysis jupyter notebooks are provided in the 

supplementary data. 

## Alignment of calcium imaging and behavioural data 

The sixth data stream with the miniscope frame trigger was used to align the behaviour data and the 

miniscope frames. In the case of frames dropped, the timestamps were looked at manually and were 

matched accordingly. All the timestamps from the operant condition data streams were converted 

to their respective frame numbers and were used for further analysis. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

## Matching cells between sessions 

To match the cells across the sessions two independent pipelines namely, CellReg 46 and CrossReg  

> 45

were used. Upon inspecting the performance of the two pipelines, CrossReg was chosen was all 

the further analysis. The data w ere then rearranged for the structures to always have the same cell 

on the same index throughout sessions. The neurons were then manually scanned through and 

discarded if they were too small or had irregular non -neuronal activity graphs. The number of cells 

detected, matched and discarded are shown in Supplementary Figure 6.

## Removal of fluorescent decay 

The extracted data w ere cropped to maximum of 30 mins to avoid any major fluorescence decay, and 

was further processed using an Asymmetric Least Squares (ALS) smoothing, to estimate and 

subtract the decay 47 , using the formula: 

The objective function used to find the baseline: 

𝑆 = ∑ 𝑤 𝑡 (𝑥 𝑡 − 𝑧 𝑡 )2

> 𝑇
> 𝑡 =1

+ λ ∑(Δ𝑛 𝑧 𝑡 )2

> 𝑡

Where,  𝑥 𝑡  is the original fluorescence trace at time  𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡  is the estimated baseline,  𝑤 𝑡  is the 

asymmetric weight at time t,  𝜆  is the smoothness penalty parameter (params.lambda, default: 10e -

7),  Δ𝑛  is the difference operator of the order n, (params.order, default: 2). 

To minimize the above function the script solves the following linear equations at each iteration: 

(𝑊 + λ𝐷 𝑇 𝐷 )𝑧 = 𝑊𝑥 

Where,  𝒙  is the trace column vector,  𝒛  is the baseline column vector,  𝑊 is a diagonal matrix containing 

the weights  𝑤 𝑡 , 𝐷  is the matrix representation of the difference operator. 

After each basline estimation the weights are updated according the the following: 

𝑤 𝑡 = {

𝑝 if 𝑥 𝑡 ≥ 𝑧 𝑡 

(1 − 𝑝 ) exp (𝑖 |𝑥 𝑡 − 𝑧 𝑡 |

𝑑 𝑠𝑠𝑛 

) if 𝑥 𝑡 < 𝑧 𝑡 

Where  𝑝  us the asymmetry parameter (params.p, default: 0.05),  𝑑 𝑠𝑠𝑛  is the sum of the absolute 

values of all negative residuals:  𝑑 𝑠𝑠𝑛 = ∑ |𝑥 𝑘 − 𝑧 𝑘 |𝑥 𝑘 <𝑧 𝑘 

Finally, the baseline (decay thereof) is subtracted from the original trace to get the correct value. 

𝑥 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 = 𝑥 − 𝑧 

Example uncorrected and corrected traces, for Rat 1 first 4 sessions are shown in Supplementary 

Figure 7.

## Extraction of trial events 

100 frames before and after each rewarded right lever press during self -adminstration, and all right 

lever press in cases of extinction and reinstatement were extracted , assuming the frames -per -

second (FPS) to be 20. We acknowledge, that it is possible that due to frame drop or lower recorded 

frame rate, these 100 frames might not exactly represent 5 second window, the error for each session 

was calculated was kept to a minimum of 50ms, as shown in Table X (AlignmentTable). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

## Extraction of trial -tuned cells 

Z-scores during the trial were calculated for all the cells individually, by normalising them by the 

mean and standard deviation as follows: 

𝑧 = 𝑥 − 𝜇 

𝜎 

Where, z: z -scored value, x: raw trace value, μ: mean raw trace value,  𝜎 : standard deviation of the raw 

trace value. 

These z -scores w ere then compared with the z -scores from the non -trial section bootst rapped 

10 ,000 times . If a cell had a significantly different z -score during trial than a non -trial section, it was 

called trial -tuned cell. If z -score of a trial -tuned cell was higher than baseline, it was termed as a 

significantly activated neuron , if it was lower than baseline, it was termed as a significantly 

suppressed neuron .

## Entropy Analysis 

Shannon’s entropy (S) for all the dynamics of the cells was calculated over a moving window of 100 

frames. The activity was divided into 100 bins, and the entropy was defined as :

S =  𝑛 × log (𝑛 )

where n represents the number of bins of activity. For the simulation, no moving window was used, 

but the activity of E1 and E2 neurons was directly divided into 100 bins and the entropy was similarly 

calculated for each trial. 

## Dual Ensemble Simulation model 

A computational simulation was developed to model neural ensemble dynamics utilizing the 

Predicted Response Outcome (PRO) framework 30 . The simulation evaluated the temporal activity 

profiles of two distinct neural populations: Ensemble 1 (E1), responsible for encoding temporal 

predictions of task events, and Ensemble 2 (E2), responsible for encoding surprise or prediction 

errors , and providing correction signals . The simulated paradigm was divided into 3 sequential 

phases, Self -Administration (where both cue and reward were present), Extinction (where no 

stimulus was present) and Reinstatement (where only cue was present). 

The results shown in the paper are with using the default parameters, which are shown in brackets 

throughout the methods section. 

The number of trials in each phase could be assigned by the parameter trialPhases ([10 5 5]), which 

takes in the number of trials to be simulated for each phase, self -administration, extinction, and 

reinstatement respectively. The total duration of each tr ial was defined by trialLength ([10]). The 

simulated time was vectorised into timepoints denoted by timeVec ([100] per trialLength, 1000 

timepoints total), to get higher temporal resolution. Within each trial, the precise timing of the 

expected cue, cueTime ([5.3]), and reward, rewardTime ([5.7]), was subjected to a Gaussian temporal 

jitter defined by stimJitter ([0.01]) t o simulate natural variability in stimulus delivery and perception. 

The activity of each neuron was modelled as a Gamma curve (high rise, riseGamma ([0.3]), slow 

decay, decayGamma ([0.6])) and a preferential temporal tuning field center (μ) distributed evenly 

across the trial length and a baseline amplitude baseline_E1/baseline_E2 ([2]). The formula used to 

calculate the activity is as follows: 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

𝑦 (𝑡 ) = 𝐴 ⋅ (𝑡 − 𝜇 )𝑛 𝑒 −(𝑡 −𝜇 )/𝜏 

(𝑛𝜏 )𝑛 𝑒 −𝑛 

Where, t: current timepoint, μ: tuning center, A: peak amplitude,  𝑛 : shape parameter (riseGamma), 

𝜏 : time -scaling parameter (decayGamma). 

The model simulated an ensemble of E1 neurons, numCells_E1 ([100]), divided into "cue -predicting" 

and "reward -predicting" cells based on a defined proportion, cueRewardRatio ([0.5]). During self -

administration, the activity amplitude of E1 neurons scaled iteratively as a function of a set 

learningRate ([0.8]), up to a defined maximum threshold, maxActivity ([10]), depending on the overlap 

between the stimulus (c ue or reward) and the activity of the E1 cell during the trial. To simulate local 

network competition, lateral inhibition, applyInhibition ([true]), was applied. A Gaussian -smoothed 

trace of the total E1 population activity smoothed by inhSigma ([1.5]) was calculated and subtracted 

from the uninhibited trace of each individual E1 neuron, scaled by a suppressionIntensity ([0.05]) 

parameter. The precise biological substrate for this inhibition, whether mediated by local neurons or 

top -down feedbac k from other cortical or subcortical regions, is not critical to the model's core 

function. 

Since the core of the simulation relies on mismatch between predictions (P_cue and P_reward) and 

the actual outcomes (E_cue and E_reward ). The actual occurrences of the cue E_cue and reward 

E_reward were modelled as binary pulses smoothed by a Gaussian kernel. The population -level 

expectation for the cue (P_cue) and reward (P_reward) was computed as the mean positive activity 

of the respec tive E1 subpopulations. 

Instantaneous prediction corrections , or "surprises" ω, were calculated at each time step. Negative 

surprise  𝜔 𝑡 

> 𝑁

, an expected event failing to occur and positive surprise  𝜔 𝑡 

> 𝑃

, an unexpected event 

occurring were defined mathematically as: 

𝜔 𝑡  

> 𝑁

= 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (0, 𝑃 𝑐𝑢𝑒 − 𝐸 𝑐𝑢𝑒 ) + max (0, 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 − 𝐸 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 )

𝜔 𝑡  

> 𝑃

= 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (0, 𝐸 𝑐𝑢𝑒 − 𝑃 𝑐𝑢𝑒 ) + max (0, 𝐸 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 − 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 )

E2 neurons, numCells_E2 ([20]), were modelled to reflect the negative surprise trace  𝜔 𝑡  

> 𝑃

generated 

by the simulation , as a correction in the following trial . The instantaneous negative surprise was 

passed through a non -linear sigmoidal transfer function to map the mismatch value to 

corresponding E2 neural activation. 

## Support Vector Machine Model 

A fine gaussian support vector machine model was trained from MATLAB’s deep network toolbox’s 

classification learner. Data 100 frames before and 100 frames after a lever press (rewarded LP in case 

of Self -Administration) was extracted as a trial (total 201 frames, including LP) . 30 models were 

trained with different seeds and were tested against 30 models trained with shuffled labels. To 

remove any class biases, the data for extinction and reinstatement was augmented by shifting the 

extracted data by +/ - 1 frame. Further, Shapley Importance curves were plotted to demonstrate 

absence of overtraining or specific learning. 

## Neural Networks 

For each of the 5 animals, neuronal data from Self -Administration sessions were aggregated by 

extracting a fixed frame window (F) around each Lever Press (LP) event. Non -LP control windows were 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

selected using a distance -maximization algorithm to ensure they were temporally distant from any 

press and of the same size . For each event, calcium traces from N neurons were flattened into a N x

F feature vector and standardized. We trained 4000 different Feedforward Neural Network (MATLAB 

fitcnet) with varying architecture (25 -layer vs deeper 32/16 -layer), varying Lambda (0 vs 0.05), PCA 

(True or False), Augmentation of the training set (True or False), Window size (F = 20 or F = 60), and 

training -test split ratios (70/30% vs 90/10%) . To ensure that the results were not biased by specific 

data splits, we validated each parameter across five unique seeds for split of the data (Monte -Carlo 

cross validation) . For each training epoch a 5 -fold cross validation was also utilized. Models were 

evaluated on the held -out test set using accuracy & ROC -AUC to measure classification success and 

threshold sensitivity. 

The different models were then compared using ANOVA. It was found that 25 -layer architecture (p = 

1.2e -07), PCA False (p = 1.4e -17), and a 90/10% split ratio (p = 1.1e -04) yielded better test accuracies. 

The impact of Lambda was also significant, 0.05 yielding better results in cases of larger windows 

(p= 5.7e -04). The effect of Augmentation was not significant on the test accuracies (p=0.92) however, 

it did lead to better training accuracies; to avoid overtraining, augmentation was not performed for 

the future models. 

Utilizing the parameters obtained above, multiple models were again trained with varying window 

length (F), ranging from 5 frames to 100 frames. It was found that the test accuracies increased until 

50 frames but then saturated. The trained models were the n fed in a full session, to identify the trial 

and non -trial sections. 

Furthermore, to test that the models are learning a biological phenomenon and not some patterns in 

the data, 500 models (100 for each rat), were trained with shuffled labels and the best parameters. 

(Supplementary Fig. 5 )

## Statistics used 

Median and 25 -75 % confidence intervals were utilized for reporting all the values. 

To account for the repeated -measures nature of the data (multiple sessions per animal), behavioural 

metrics and percentage of activated/suppressed neurons were analysed using Linear Mixed -Effects 

(LME) models. Experimental Phase (e.g., Self -Administration, Extinction, Reinstatement) was treated 

as a fixed effect, while Animal Identity was included as a random intercept to account for individual 

variability and non -independence of observations. Time -based metrics (ITI and durations) were log -

transformed prior to analysis to ensure normalit y of residuals. Pairwise post -hoc comparisons 

between phases were performed using contrast matrices within the LME framework, with 

significance set at α=0.05. 

## Graphical User Interface based Analysis software 

All the analysis can be redone, with the help of GUI script available with the data. Using these GUI 

scripts one can plot various graphs, for different types of cell. Explore individual cell activity over 

different sessions, compare it with baseline, measu re p -values, and explore heatmaps generated for 

all the trials for a particular session. One can also recreate all the figures in the paper and change the 

parameters for SVM, NN, and the simulation, and run them again. (Supplementary Fig. 8 ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

# References 

1. Euston, D. R., Gruber, A. J. & McNaughton, B. L. The role of medial prefrontal cortex in memory 

and decision making. Neuron 76 , 1057 –1070 (2012). 

2. Quirk, G. J., Russo, G. K., Barron, J. L. & Lebron, K. The Role of Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex in 

the Recovery of Extinguished Fear. J. Neurosci. 20 , 6225 –6231 (2000). 

3. Milad, M. R. & Quirk, G. J. Neurons in medial prefrontal cortex signal memory for fear extinction. 

Nature 420 , 70 –74 (2002). 

4. Lebrón, K., Milad, M. R. & Quirk, G. J. Delayed Recall of Fear Extinction in Rats With Lesions of 

Ventral Medial Prefrontal Cortex. Learn. Mem. 11 , 544 –548 (2004). 

5. Santini, E., Ge, H., Ren, K., Peña de Ortiz, S. & Quirk, G. J. Consolidation of fear extinction 

requires protein synthesis in the medial prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 24 ,

5704 –5710 (2004). 

6. Quirk, G. J., Garcia, R. & González -Lima, F. Prefrontal Mechanisms in Extinction of Conditioned 

Fear. Biol. Psychiatry 60 , 337 –343 (2006). 

7. Burgos -Robles, A., Vidal -Gonzalez, I., Santini, E. & Quirk, G. J. Consolidation of Fear Extinction 

Requires NMDA Receptor -Dependent Bursting in the Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex. Neuron 

53 , 871 –880 (2007). 

8. Santini, E., Quirk, G. J. & Porter, J. T. Fear Conditioning and Extinction Differentially Modify the 

Intrinsic Excitability of Infralimbic Neurons. J. Neurosci. 28 , 4028 –4036 (2008). 

9. Mueller, D., Porter, J. T. & Quirk, G. J. Noradrenergic Signaling in Infralimbic Cortex Increases 

Cell Excitability and Strengthens Memory for Fear Extinction. J. Neurosci. 28 , 369 –375 (2008). 

10. Peters, J., Kalivas, P. W. & Quirk, G. J. Extinction circuits for fear and addiction overlap in 

prefrontal cortex. Learn. Mem. 16 , 279 –288 (2009). 

11. Koya, E. et al. Role of ventral medial prefrontal cortex in incubation of cocaine craving. 

Neuropharmacology 56 , 177 –185 (2009). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

12. LaLumiere , R. T., Smith, K. C. & Kalivas, P. W. Neural circuit competition in cocaine -seeking: 

roles of the infralimbic cortex and nucleus accumbens shell. Eur. J. Neurosci. 35 , 614 –622 

(2012). 

13. Moorman, D. E. & Aston -Jones, G. Prefrontal neurons encode context -based response 

execution and inhibition in reward seeking and extinction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112 , 9472 –

9477 (2015). 

14. Warren, B. L. et al. Distinct Fos -Expressing Neuronal Ensembles in the Ventromedial Prefrontal 

Cortex Mediate Food Reward and Extinction Memories. J. Neurosci. 36 , 6691 –6703 (2016). 

15. Cameron, C. M., Murugan, M., Choi, J. Y., Engel, E. A. & Witten, I. B. Increased Cocaine 

Motivation Is Associated with Degraded Spatial and Temporal Representations in IL -NAc 

Neurons. Neuron 103 , 80 -91.e7 (2019). 

16. Madangopal, R. et al. Inactivation of the infralimbic cortex decreases discriminative stimulus -

controlled relapse to cocaine seeking in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 46 , 1969 –1980 

(2021). 

17. Suto, N. et al. Distinct memory engrams in the infralimbic cortex of rats control opposing 

environmental actions on a learned behavior. eLife 5, e21920 (2016). 

18. Peters, J., LaLumiere, R. T. & Kalivas, P. W. Infralimbic Prefrontal Cortex Is Responsible for 

Inhibiting Cocaine Seeking in Extinguished Rats. J. Neurosci. 28 , 6046 –6053 (2008). 

19. Gourley, S. L. & Taylor, J. R. Going and stopping: dichotomies in behavioral control by the 

prefrontal cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 19 , 656 –664 (2016). 

20. Halladay, L. R. & Blair, H. T. Prefrontal infralimbic cortex mediates competition between 

excitation and inhibition of body movements during pavlovian fear conditioning. J. Neurosci. 

Res. 95 , 853 –862 (2017). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

21. Caballero, J. P., Scarpa, G. B., Remage -Healey, L. & Moorman, D. E. Differential Effects of 

Dorsal and Ventral Medial Prefrontal Cortex Inactivation during Natural Reward Seeking, 

Extinction, and Cue -Induced Reinstatement. eNeuro 6, (2019). 

22. Nett, K. E. & LaLumiere, R. T. Infralimbic cortex functioning across motivated behaviors: Can 

the differences be reconciled? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 131 , 704 –721 (2021). 

23. Coutureau, E. & Killcross , S. Inactivation of the infralimbic prefrontal cortex reinstates goal -

directed responding in overtrained rats. Behav. Brain Res. 146 , 167 –174 (2003). 

24. Barker, J. M., Taylor, J. R. & Chandler, L. J. A unifying model of the role of the infralimbic cortex in 

extinction and habits. Learn. Mem. 21 , 441 –448 (2014). 

25. Barker, J. M., Glen, W. B., Linsenbardt, D. N., Lapish, C. C. & Chandler, L. J. Habitual Behavior Is 

Mediated by a Shift in Response -Outcome Encoding by Infralimbic Cortex. eNeuro 4, (2017). 

26. Pfarr, S. et al. Losing Control: Excessive Alcohol Seeking after Selective Inactivation of Cue -

Responsive Neurons in the Infralimbic Cortex. J. Neurosci. 35 , 10750 –10761 (2015). 

27. Augur, I. F., Wyckoff, A. R., Aston -Jones, G., Kalivas, P. W. & Peters, J. Chemogenetic Activation 

of an Extinction Neural Circuit Reduces Cue -Induced Reinstatement of Cocaine Seeking. J. 

Neurosci. 36 , 10174 –10180 (2016). 

28. Müller Ewald, V. A. et al. Attenuation of cocaine seeking in rats via enhancement of infralimbic 

cortical activity using stable step -function opsins. Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 236 , 479 –490 

(2019). 

29. Warren, B. L. et al. Separate vmPFC Ensembles Control Cocaine Self -Administration Versus 

Extinction in Rats. J. Neurosci. 39 , 7394 –7407 (2019). 

30. Alexander, W. H. & Brown, J. W. Medial prefrontal cortex as an action -outcome predictor. Nat. 

Neurosci. 14 , 1338 –1344 (2011). 

31. Alexander, W. H. & Brown, J. W. Hierarchical Error Representation: A Computational Model of 

Anterior Cingulate and Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex. Neural Comput. 27 , 2354 –2410 (2015). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

32. Yin, H. H. & Knowlton, B. J. The role of the basal ganglia in habit formation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 

7, 464 –476 (2006). 

33. Do -Monte, F. H., Manzano -Nieves, G., Quiñones -Laracuente, K., Ramos -Medina, L. & Quirk, G. 

J. Revisiting the Role of Infralimbic Cortex in Fear Extinction with Optogenetics. J. Neurosci. 35 ,

3607 –3615 (2015). 

34. Aharoni, D. & Hoogland, T. M. Circuit Investigations With Open -Source Miniaturized 

Microscopes: Past, Present and Future. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13 , (2019). 

35. Averbeck, B. B., Latham, P. E. & Pouget, A. Neural correlations, population coding and 

computation. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 358 –366 (2006). 

36. Panzeri, S., Harvey, C. D., Piasini, E., Latham, P. E. & Fellin, T. Cracking the Neural Code for 

Sensory Perception by Combining Statistics, Intervention, and Behavior. Neuron 93 , 491 –507 

(2017). 

37. Stokes, M. G. et al. Dynamic coding for cognitive control in prefrontal cortex. Neuron 78 , 364 –

375 (2013). 

38. Spaak, E., Watanabe, K., Funahashi, S. & Stokes, M. G. Stable and Dynamic Coding for Working 

Memory in Primate Prefrontal Cortex. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 37 , 6503 –6516 (2017). 

39. Olshausen, B. A. & Field, D. J. Sparse coding of sensory inputs. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 14 , 481 –

487 (2004). 

40. Bossert, J. M. et al. Ventral medial prefrontal cortex neuronal ensembles mediate context -

induced relapse to heroin. Nat. Neurosci. 14 , 420 –422 (2011). 

41. Whitaker, L. R. et al. Bidirectional Modulation of Intrinsic Excitability in Rat Prelimbic Cortex 

Neuronal Ensembles and Non -Ensembles after Operant Learning. J. Neurosci. 37 , 8845 –8856 

(2017). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

42. Warren, B. L., Suto, N. & Hope, B. T. Mechanistic Resolution Required to Mediate Operant 

Learned Behaviors: Insights from Neuronal Ensemble -Specific Inactivation. Front. Neural 

Circuits 11 , 28 (2017). 

43. Giannone, F. et al. Bad habits -good goals? Meta -analysis and translation of the habit construct 

to alcoholism. Transl. Psychiatry 14 , 298 (2024). 

44. Samson, H. H., Pfeffer, A. O. & Tolliver, G. A. Oral ethanol self -administration in rats: models of 

alcohol -seeking behavior. Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 12 , 591 –598 (1988). 

45. Dong, Z. et al. Minian, an open -source miniscope analysis pipeline. eLife 11 , e70661 (2022). 

46. Sheintuch, L. et al. Tracking the Same Neurons across Multiple Days in Ca2+ Imaging Data. Cell 

Rep. 21 , 1102 –1115 (2017). 

47. Eilers, P. H. C. A perfect smoother. Anal. Chem. 75 , 3631 –3636 (2003). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

## Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge the excellent technical support by Michaela Kaiser and Marion 

Schmitt. We acknowledge the use of Gemini (Google) for linguistic editing and structural refinement 

of the manuscript text. Custom MATLAB scripts were used for data analysis. Initial code structures 

were refactored and optimized using Gemini (Google); however, all final outputs were manually 

verified by the authors for mathematical accuracy and logical consistency. We acknowledge funding 

by the German Research Foundation (CRC 1134 functional ensembles, project B4) , DFG, 

402170461 -TRR265 (Spanagel et al., 2024), and ERA -Net JTC programme (project ID 01EW2402 -

IBRAA. 

## Author Contributions 

A.A. , I.S., T.K., and W.S. wrote the manuscript. A.A. and I.S. analysed the data. I.S. S.P., J.B -F. 

performed the experiments. T.K. and W.S. supervised the project. 

# Data availability 

All custom MATLAB scripts, object -oriented classes, and functions utilized for neural data analysis, 

behavioral tracking, and alignment are publicly available on GitHub at 

https://github.com/tkunerlab/mPFC_DualEnsemble. This repository also includes the processed 

behavioral metrics, alignment datasets, and statistical summaries required to replicate the findings, 

alongside the exact source code used to generate all manuscript figures. Additionally, the repository 

features interactive data explorers to facilitate the dynamic visualization and inspection of the 

underlying datasets. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

# Figures 

Figure 1: Behavioural characterization of cue -conditioned operant task 

A. Schematic of experimental design showing self -administration (S, reward + cue), extinction (E, no 

reward, no cue), and reinstatement (R, cue only). B. Lever presses (total: black; rewarded: red) across 

sessions. C. Probability of a head entry following a lever press. D. Inter -trial interval (ITI) between 

consecutive active lever presses across task conditions . E. Latency from lever press to subsequent 

head entry. For the box plots, the central mark indicates the median, and the bottom and top edges 

of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. The whiskers extend to the most 

extreme data points not considered outliers. Each individual scatter point represents an animal. (for 

S n=5, for E,R n=3), *p<0.05 Liner -mixed effects model. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

Figure 2. In vivo calcium imaging and extraction of neural dynamics in the infralimbic cortex. 

A. Maximum intensity projection (MIP) of raw fluorescence during the initial 5 minutes of a 

representative self -administration session (Rat 1, S1); scale bar, 200um. B. Background -subtracted 

(dF/F) MIP for the same epoch, illustrating enhanced signal -to -noise contrast; scale bar, 200um. C. 

Extracted spatial footprints of identified neurons within the field of view (FOV). Five representative 

neurons are highlighted in blue for subsequent representation; scale bar, 76 pixels. D. Histological 

verification of GRIN lens placement targeting the infralimbic (IL) cortex. Immunofluorescence 

showing GCaMP6 expression (green) and DAPI nuclear staining (blue). E. Temporal activity heatmap 

for 60 neurons over the 5-minute period (Rat 1, SA1). Neuronal activity is normalized (0 –1, grayscale) 

and plotted against time. Red dashed lines denote lever presses. Five representative neurons are 

highlighted in blue. F. Extracted calcium traces for the five representative neurons highlighted in (C) 

and (E), showing normalized fluorescence intensity across the 5 -minute representative recording 

window. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Figure 3: Tuned Cells and their activity around behavioural markers. 

A1. Representative heatmap of an activated neuron time -locked to the head entry (green line). Each 

row represents a single trial; the red vertical line denotes the preceding lever press. A2. A line graph 

showing the mean z -scored activity for all trials (orange dark line) for a sample activated neuron. 

Shaded area represents ± SEM. The grey horizontal line indicates the threshold for significance 

derived from bootstrapped null distributions. B1 . Trial -by -trial heatmaps for three functional cell 

types: neurons showing peak activity prior to a lever press (pre -LP), between the lever press and head 

entry (LP -HE interval), and following a head entry (post -HE). B2. Probability density distributions of 

peak activity relative to behavioural markers for the cell types shown in (D1), calculated across all 

recorded trials. C. Line graph representative suppressed neuron showing mean z -scored activity 

(blue dark line) relative to the behavioural event; shaded area represents ± SEM. D. Percentage of 

significantly activated (orange) and suppressed (blue) neurons across self -administration, 

extinction, and reinstatement sessions. * p -value<0.05, $ activated neuron percentage in R sig. 

different from SA and E sessions, p= 0.0097. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Figure 4: Characteristic tuning curves for different population of cells across different session 

types. 

A–C Population -averaged z -scored activity aligned to lever press (red dashed line) during self -

administration ( A), extinction ( B), and reinstatement ( C). Within each stage, rows show activity for all 

neurons ( 1), tuned neurons ( 2), activated neurons ( 3), and suppressed neurons (4). Vertical red 

dash ed line represents lever press. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

Figure 5: Dynamics of the neurons. 

A. Spatial footprints of recorded neurons from an example Rat 1, color -coded by their functional 

modulation: activated (orange), suppressed (blue), bi -directionally modulated (gray), or non -

significant (white) relative to task events. The size of the cell represents its stability over the sessions 

of that type. B. Sander plot illustrating the transitions in functional cell identity between consecutive 

sessions (N to N+1). C. Trial -by -trial modulation heatmap across all neurons (y -axis) for first 5 self -

administration sessions from Rat 1. Each cell is categorized per trial as excited, suppressed, or non -

significant using the colour scheme in ( A). D. All neurons from 3 rats (329 neurons) sorted 

hierarchically based on their activity across sessions ( D1 ) and session types (D2 ), using the colour 

scheme in (A). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

Figure 6: Stabilisation of the neural dynamics 

A. Entropy as a function of normalized session duration (100 bins) for the initial five SA sessions (n = 

5 rats). Solid lines indicate the mean; shaded areas represent ± SEM. B-C. Quantification of intra -

session (B1) and inter -session (B2) entropy shifts across the self -administration stages . C. 

Comparative population dynamics during the first 50 lever presses (C1) versus the subsequent 50 

lever presses (C2, trials 51 –100). D. Z-scored activity of the significantly activated neurons across the 

first 4 self -administration sessions (n=5). *p<0.05, Wilcox on ’s signrank, LME. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

Figure 7: Dynamics of the simulation 

Activity of simulated E1 and E2 neurons, over various trials. Trial 1 -10: Self -Administration, Trial 11 -

15: Extinction, Trial 16 -20: Reinstatement. AX: Self -Administration trials, BX: Extinction trials, CX: 

Reinstatement trials. X1: E1 activated neurons, X2: E1 suppressed neurons, X3: E2 neurons. Red 

dashed line denotes lever press. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Figure 8. Machine learning -based classification and prediction of behavioural states. 

A. Training, test, and shuffled accuracies for the SVM models trained (n=30) . B. Confusion matrix for 

the SVM classifier illustrating the accuracy of session -type predictions across the task conditions .

The numbers in the bracket show the number of trials classified in the respective class. C. Temporal 

SHAP (Shapley Additive Explanations) importance curves for the three task conditions , illustrating 

feature contribution to the model as a function of time relative to the lever press. C. Comparative 

performance (training , test , and shuffled accuracy) for the Neural Network (NN) models trained with 

best -performing parameters (See methods, 5 seeds x 5 rats, 25 models) . E. Test accuracies of NN 

models trained with the best -performing parameters on real (black) vs shuffled (grey) data. F. 

Probability of a trial occurrence quantified by the sample NN model (seed = 1) on a representative 

session. (Rat 1, S1). Red dashed lines indicate a rewarded lever press. *p<0.05, Wilcoxon’s signrank 

test. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

Supplementary Fig. 1 

A. A 3d rendered model of the conditioning setup. B. A schematic of the mPFC, along with a sketch 

of rat implanted with a miniscope. C. Schematic of the trial structure. Yellow boxes denote cue light, 

red bars denote lever presses, blue drop denotes reward. D. Number of lever presses by the rats 

during different session types. E. Conditional probability of a head entry (HE) occurring after a lever 

press (LP). F. Intertrial interval between subsequent lever presses for all sessions. G. Time taken by 

the rat from lever press to head entry. H-K. Number (H,J) and duration (I,K) of head entries per session 

for all session types (H,I) and sessions (J,K) respectively. For the box plots, the central mark indicates 

the median, and the bottom and top edges of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles, 

respectively. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered outliers. S - Self -

administration, E -Extinction, R -Reinstatement. Red boxes denote the active lever press, and black 

boxes denote the inactive. For S, n=5; for E and R, n=3; *p<0.05; Liner -mixed effects model. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Supplementary Figure 2. Mutually exclusive Extinction and Reinstatement neurons. 

Activity of the mutually exclusive neurons of Extinction and Reinstatement (n=16). Black line 

indicates the mean, shaded area represents SEM, red dashed line denotes lever press. 

Supplementary Figure 3: PCA for trial progression. 

Principal component analysis (PCA) showing the population trajectory during the first five self -

administration (S) sessions. Data are projected onto the first two PCs, with trial progression 

represented by a colour gradient from dark blue (start/first trial) to bright yellow (end/last trial). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

Supplementary Figure 4: Temporal dynamics of prediction and surprise. 

A: Heatmap representations of signal intensity over time. Each row of heatmaps illustrates the 

temporal evolution of specific signals across successive trials (y -axis: trials; x -axis: simulated time). 

Colour intensity corresponds to signal magnitude, ranging from 0 (no signal, dark) to 1 (maximal 

activity, bright). A11 –A12: Negative and positive surprise signals, A21 –A22: Predicted cue and reward 

signals, A31 –A32: Actual cue and reward signals. B: Comparative magnitude of surprise over trials. 

The line graph tracks the peak intensity of surprise signals as learning progresses. The black line 

denotes negative surprise, while the grey line represents positive surprise. C: Temporal evolution of 

cue (red) and reward (black) predictions. The relationship between predicted and actual events is 

shown across trials (x -axis: trial number; y -axis: time). The horizontal line indicates the timing of the 

actual cue and reward. Dots r epresent the predicted cue, error bars represent standard deviation of 

the prediction, dot size reflects prediction strength. D: The panel displays the calculated Shannon’s 

entropy for both E1 and E2 ensembles over trials. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

Supplementary Figure 5: Neural Network model performances. 

A: Training and test accuracies for 4000 models trained across the whole hyperparametric space. B: 

Test accuracies for the models trained with the best -performing parameters for each rat with real 

labels (black) vs shuffled labels (grey). Real data: 5 models per rat, Shuffled data: 100 models per 

rat. C: Test accuracies of models trained in (A), split to understand the effect of different parameters 

on performance. *p<0 -05 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

Supplementary Figure 6. Additional information about the data. 

A. Number of cells detected per session type. B. Number of cells that matched per session type. C. 

Number of units that were discarded per session type. D. Length of the sessions recorded. The 

central mark indicates the median, and the bottom and top edges of the box indicate the 25th and 

75th percentiles, respectively. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered 

outliers. Each individual scatter point represents an animal. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

Supplementary Figure 7: Florescence decay correction 

Uncorrected and corrected traces from Rat 1 for the first four self -administration sessions. Black 

lines indicate uncorrected traces, whereas red lines indicate corrected traces. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint 41 

Supplementary Figure 8: UI based data explorers and simulation. 

A: Cell activity explorer GUI. B: Population dynamics explorer GUI. C: Status Explorer GUI. D: 

Simulation parameters GUI. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 2, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.29.735227 doi: bioRxiv preprint Saccharin self-

administration 

Cue-induced 

reinstatement 

Extinction 

Cue light 

Reward 

> Number of Lever Presses Intertrial Interval between
> lever presses (s)

0

50 

100 

150 

S E R S E R

S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  S7  E1  E2 

Sessions 

E3  E4  R1  R2 

> P (Head entry | Lever press)

0

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1

1.2 

*

A

B

C

D E

0

0.4 

0.8 

1.2 

1.6 

2

> Time from lever press to
> head entry(s)

Sessions 

S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  S7  E1  E2  E3  E4  R1  R2 

0

40 

80 

120 

160 

Rewarded 

Normal 

200 

* *A C

E

F

DB

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

1

25  50  75  100  125  150  175  200  225  250  275  300 0

1

Time (s) 

> Normalised activity

#15 

#27 

#46 

#49 

#50 

25 0 50  75  100  125  150  175  200  225  250  275  300 

10 

20 

30 

40 

60  0

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1

> Neuron Number

Time (s) 

Lever press 

200 μm 200 μm 

#50 

#49 

#46 

#27 

#15 

76 pixels 

> Normalised activity
> PL
> 500μm
> IL

-4 -5  -3  -2  -1  0 1 2 3 4 5

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

> Trial Number

Time from lever press (s) 

Time from lever press (s) 

> Peak probability

-2  -1  0 1 2

0

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1

#7 

#27  #49 

Lever press 

Head entry 

Time from head entry (s)  Session type 

-5  -4  -3  -2  -1  0 1 2 3 4 5

-1.0 

-0.5 

0

0.5 

Baseline 

Trial trace 

> z-score (sample suppresed neuron)

Lever press 

Head entry 

2

6

10 

2

6

10 

-1.5 -2  -1  -0.5  0 0.5  1 1.5  2 0

1

0

1

0

1

2

6

10 

#7 

#49 

#27 

> Trial Number

-4 -5  -3  -2  -1  0 1 2 3 4 5

-1 

0

1

2

> z-score (sample activated neuron)

Time from head entry (s) 

Time from head entry (s) 

Lever press 

Head entry 

Baseline 

Trial Trace 

Lever press 

Head entry 

Lever press 

Head entry 

A1 

A2 

D

B1 

B2 

C

> Percent of neurons (%)

* *

1

0 Normalised activity 

> $

0

C1 

Reinstatement 

> All neurons Tuned neurons

0 0

0 0 0

A1 

A2 

B1 

B2  C2 

0.5z 

2 sec 

Self-Administration  Extinction 

> Activated neurons Suppressed neurons

0 0 0

0 0 0

A3 

A4 

B3 

B4 

C3 

C4 

Lever press Self-Admin 1  Self-Admin 2  Self-Admin 3  Self-Admin 4  Self-Admin 5  Self-Admin.  Extinction  Re. 

Trial number  Session  Session types 

5 10  15 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

5 10  15  5 10  15  5 10  15 5 10  15 

> Neuron ID

329 

1

35 

54 

81 

157 

1

21 

37 

65 

145 

329  S E RS1  E2 S5  R2 S3  E4 S7 S2  E3 S6 S4  R1 E1 

> Neuron ID

Suppresse 

d

Excite 

d

Not Sig 

Activated Suppressed 

Activated 

> Suppressed NotSignificant NotDetected

Session N  Session N+1 

A B

C D1  D2 

Stability Index 

Self-Administration  Extinction  Reinstatement Self-Admin 1 

0 50  100 

1

1.5 

2

2.5 

3 Self-Admin 2 

0 50  100 

1

1.5 

2

2.5 

3 Self-Admin 3 

0 50  100 

1

1.5 

2

3

2.5 

Self-Admin 4 

0 50  100 

1

1.5 

2

2.5 

3

> Activity (z-score)

-1 

-0.5 

0

0.5 

1

1.5 

2

-1 

-0.5 

0

0.5 

1

1.5 

2

-1 

-0.5 

0

0.5 

1

1.5 

2

-1 

-0.5 

0

0.5 

1

1.5 

2

Self-Admin 1  Self-Admin 2  Self-Admin 3  Self-Admin 4 D

Time from lever press (s) 

-5  -2.5  0 2.5  5 -5  -2.5  0 2.5  5 -5  -2.5  0 2.5  5 -5  -2.5  0 2.5  5

A

B1  B2  C1  C2 

0.1 

dF/F0 

2 sec 

0.1 

dF/F0 

2 sec 

0.21  0.21 

Lever Press Lever Press 

Sessions 

S1  S2  S3  S4 

0

0.5 

1

1.5 

2

2.5 

3

3.5 

*

*

> Activity (raw)

Start  End 

0

0.5 

1

1.5 

2

2.5 

3

3.5 

> Entropy (bits)  Entropy (bits)
> Entropy (bits)

*

Normalised session length 0 5 10 

-2 

0

2

4

6

8

10  Trial 1 

> Trial 3
> Trial 6
> Trial 8
> Trial 10

0 5 10 

-2 

0

2

4

6

8

10 

Extinction Self-Admin. 

> Trial 11
> Trial 12
> Trial 13
> Trial 13
> Trial 14
> Trial 15

0 5 10 

-2 

0

2

4

6

8

10 

Reinstatement 

> Trial 16
> Trial 17
> Trial 18
> Trial 18
> Trial 19
> Trial 20

0 5 10 

10 

-3 

-2 

-1 

0

1

0 5 10 

-3 

-2 

-1 

0

1

0 5 10 

-3 

-2 

-1 

0

1

0 05

-0.5 

0

0.5 

1

5 10 

0

0.5 

1

0 5 10 

-0.5 

0

0.5 

1

> E1 activated (n=8) E1 suppressed (n=92) E2 neurons (n=20)

Time (s) 

> Activity (a.u.) Activity (a.u.)  Activity (a.u.)

C1 A1 

A2 

B1 

B2  C2 

A3  B3  C3 D

F

E

CBA

-4 

-3 

-2 

-1 

0

1

2

3

4

5 10  -3 

Self-Administration 

Extinction 

Reinstatement 

x

-5  -4  -3  -2  -1  0 1 2 3 4 5

Seconds from lever press 

> Shapley Importance

Self-Admin  Extinction  Reinstatement 

Predicted Class 

> Self-Admin Extinction Reinstatement
> True Class

10.5% 

2.6% 

8.8%  4.7% 

1.1% 

86.5% 

88.4% 

97.4% 

(49) 

(12) 

(22) 

(5) 

(404) 

(412) 

(454) 

(41) 

> Test Accuracy (%)

5 10  15  20  25  30  35  40  45  50  55  60  65  70  75  80  85  90  95  100 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

110 

> Real Data
> Shuffled
> Test Accuracy (%)

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100  *

*

Training  Test  Shuffled 

> Test Accuracy (%)

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

Training  Test  Shuffled