Title: Homeostatic Plasticity Enables Stable, Flexible, and Tunable Assemblies

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097v3.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# Homeostatic Plasticity Enables Stable yet Tunable Neuronal Assemblies 

Michelle C Miller 

Committee on Computational Neuroscience. Grossman Center for Quantitative Biology and Human Behavior University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA 

Christoph Miehl ∗

Department of Neurobiology Grossman Center for Quantitative Biology and Human Behavior University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA †

Brent Doiron ∗

Departments of Neurobiology and Statistics Grossman Center for Quantitative Biology and Human Behavior University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA ‡

(Dated: June 21, 2026) Strongly interconnected neuronal populations, called assemblies, dynamically form through synap-tic plasticity mechanisms and are thought to be a substrate for memories in the brain. Many as-sembly formation models use Hebbian excitatory-to-excitatory plasticity, where coordinated activity strengthens recurrent structure. However, these models typically yield binary assembly outcomes: networks with either weak (no assembly) or maximally strong (assembly) connectivity. We con-sider networks with a combination of Hebbian excitatory-to-excitatory plasticity and inhibitory-to-excitatory synapses with plasticity that homeostatically stabilizes excitatory neuron firing at a target value. When we set excitatory-to-excitatory plasticity to be homeostatically compliant , in that potentiation and depression are balanced at the homeostatic target firing rate, we find a stable continuum of synaptic strengths, and assembly structure is no longer binary. We use a recurrent network of spiking neuron models and an associated mean-field theory to identify this continuum as a line attractor in synaptic weight space. While along the attractor, homeostasis ensures that neuronal firing rates are invariant, the dynamical response properties of the network are quite mal-leable, with strongly coupled networks having high gain and longer timescale responses. Using our mean-field theory we show how correlated stochastic spiking activity among the excitatory neu-rons can destroy the line attractor, yet this can be mitigated when correlated inputs are shared across the excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Altogether, we provide a learning framework based on homeostasis, where a tunable and flexible assembly structure is possible. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Groups of neurons with temporally correlated spiking activity are thought to be the basic unit of representa-tions and memory in the brain [1–3]. Evidence suggests that such co-activated groups of cells appear upon stim-ulus presentation [4, 5], during spontaneous activity [6] and have been linked to animal behavior [7–9]. The phys-ical substrate of this correlated activity is believed to be assembly structure within the network, in which func-tionally related neurons are connected through strong synaptic connections [3, 10–15]. This long-standing no-tion goes back to Hebbian theory [16, 17], where long term synaptic potentiation occurs when pre- and post-synaptic neurons have coincident activation. Indeed, measurements of neural connectivity show that neurons tuned to the same stimuli are both more likely to be con-nected and share strong connections [18–21].    

> ∗These two authors have contributed equally.
> †cmiehl@uchicago.edu
> ‡bdoiron@uchicago.edu

It is believed that long-term excitatory-to-excitatory (E → E) synaptic plasticity underlies assembly for-mation [3, 22]. A large number of computational studies show how assembly formation can follow from biologically-observed plasticity rules [11–13, 23]. How-ever, pure Hebbian E → E plasticity is generically un-stable: recurrent excitation amplifies itself and drives unchecked growth in excitatory neuron firing rates and 

E → E synaptic weights [12, 22, 24, 25]. A variety of mechanisms have been used to stabilize assembly forma-tion: weight normalization of the incoming weights into a neuron [24], metaplasticity in which the plasticity rules themselves adapt [26, 27], or upper bounds on synaptic weights [13, 14, 28]. These computational mechanisms can be linked to ex-perimentally described homeostatic and compensatory processes, including synaptic scaling [29, 30] and het-erosynaptic plasticity [31, 32]. However, such global homeostatic mechanisms are generally too slow, by them-selves, to stabilize fast Hebbian E → E plasticity in re-current network models [25, 33, 34]. This timescale prob-lem motivates faster local compensatory processes. Ex-perimental and theoretical work point to homeostatic in-

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2hibitory to excitatory ( I → E) plasticity as a robust and fast stabilizing mechanism [35–38]. Homeostatic plastic-ity here refers to modifications of inhibitory synapses that keeps each postsynaptic neuron near a target firing-rate during (and after) learning [25, 34–36, 38]. Such experi-mentally supported homeostatic I → E plasticity [39–42] occurs on the timescale of E → E plasticity [40, 43] and can keep a balance between excitation and inhibition ( EI 

balance) [12, 35, 44–46]. In computational models, home-ostatic inhibitory plasticity that promotes E/I balance in turn stabilizes assembly formation [12, 13, 37]. While homeostatic plasticity can facilitate network fir-ing rate stabilization, when combined in computational models with Hebbian E → E plasticity rules, there re-mains a severe limitation to stabilize the weight dynam-ics: network models still need a hard [13, 28] or soft [12, 23, 47–49] synaptic weight threshold. This is be-cause after sufficient training, an assembly of strongly-coupled neurons continues to potentiate recurrent con-nections post training through a resurgence of coordi-nated spiking activity. By contrast, with insufficient training the connections depress and assembly structure dissipates after training [12, 13, 23, 28]. In the long time limit post-training there are typically then two potential outcomes: an assembly with maximally strong recurrent connections, or a population of neurons with minimally weak connections and therefore does not store the train-ing experience [47, 50–53]. This binary nature of assem-bly structure greatly limits the potential for experiences that differ in intensity to be reflected in the learned as-sembly architecture and their response properties. In our study we consider recurrent networks of spiking neuron models with homeostatic I → E synaptic plas-ticity, and rate dependent Hebbian E → E plasticity with one crucial constraint. We introduce the concept of homeostatically compliant E → E Hebbian plasticity: when a postsynaptic E neuron fires at the homeostatic target rate set by the I → E synaptic plasticity, then the potentiation and depression of the E → E plastic-ity are balanced and there is no net weight change (this case was also studied in [37, 54]). We show that this combination of homeostatic I → E and homeostatically compliant E → E plasticity can lead to a continuum of stable configurations in synaptic weight space, so that trained assemblies need not be binary in strength (see also [37]). To gain deeper understanding, we develop a mean-field model of the weight dynamics and describe the continuum as a line attractor in the space of I → E and 

E → E weights. Using our theory we derive the model parameter conditions for the line attractor to exist. While synaptic line attractors have been described in previous computational work [37, 54], their functional role in assembly learning within recurrent networks re-mains unstudied. One possibility is that attractor dy-namics along a continuum provide a mechanism for as-semblies to express graded functional states rather than discrete weak-or-strong connectivity regimes. Neurons have heterogeneous gains, tuning widths and amplitude, etc. that depend on context [55], recent spiking history [56], and behavioral state [57–60]. Since neural assem-blies are composed of such heterogeneous neurons, their collective responses may likewise vary in a graded man-ner, reflecting differences in neuronal participation, ac-tivation strength, and response reliability [61]. Consis-tent with this view, population activity can vary across repeated experiences and across days [62–64], and the strength and timescale of population responses can re-flect behavioral variables such as confidence, salience, or memory strength [9, 64]. We use our model and associ-ated mean-field theory to show that for synaptic weights on the line attractor, while the network firing rates are in-variant due to homeostasis, the dynamical response prop-erties of neurons in the network can vary substantially. Finally, the neutral stability inherent along a line at-tractor often prompts an analysis of how fluctuations af-fect dynamics [65–68]. Using our linear response theory we show how correlated external fluctuating that cause shared variability across neurons, creates a positive de-terministic drift in synaptic weight space, effectively de-stroying the line attractor. Fortunately, such drift can be mitigated by coordinating external inputs to excita-tory and inhibitory neurons, to allow recurrent networks dynamics to cancel shared variability [69–71]. Our findings broaden the functional role of homeostatic plasticity in recurrent networks. While, canonically, the literature has discussed how homeostatic plasticity stabi-lizes networks through preventing runaway dynamics, we propose it serve an accompanying function of encoding variable and tunable response properties. That is, with homeostasis, when a network learns, it learns a particular response, not just to respond.  

> II. RESULTS Recurrent excitatory-inhibitory network model with synaptic plasticity

To explore how excitatory and inhibitory learning rules shape emergent synaptic weight dynamics, we construct a recurrent network model with NE excitatory ( E) and 

NI inhibitory ( I) spiking neuron models that are driven by NX external ( X) neurons ( Fig. 1a ; see Methods ). To simplify exposition we take NE = NI = NX ≡ N .The spiking activity of each E and I neuron is generated by a Hawkes process [72, 73]. Briefly, the probability of neuron i in population α ∈ { E, I } emitting a spike over a short time interval is proportional to a dynamic intensity function (firing rate) Λiα(t), which obeys: ⃗

Λ( t) = W

Z ∞

> 0

g(t − u)d⃗M (u) + WX

Z ∞

> 0

g(t − u)d⃗M X (u)

Here ⃗ Λ = [Λ 1 

> E

, . . . ΛNE , Λ1 

> I

, . . . ΛNI ] is the vector of in-tensity functions for the recurrent neurons. The kernel 

g(t−u) = 1 

> τα

e−(t−u)/τ α H(t−u) models synaptic coupling 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3(a) (b) (c) 

# LTD LTP 

# (d) 

FIG. 1. Spiking and STDP framework for recurrent Hawkes process network. a. Schematic of the recurrent excitatory-inhibitory ( EI ) network. Neurons in external populations ΛαX (α ∈ { E, I }) fire as homogeneous Poisson processes with rates aE and aI , respectively. In the EI network plastic synaptic connections are solid red ( wEE ) and blue ( wEI ), while non-plastic connections are dashed ( wIE and wII ). b. Schematic of the spike timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) as a function of pre- postsynaptic spike delay ∆t. Weights potentiate if pre- and postsynaptic neurons spike with a small delay |∆t|, and depress otherwise. c. Top: Schematic of the inputs to E neurons i and j with intensity functions ΛiE , ΛjE (for i, j ∈ (1 ...N E )) .We show projecting external input neurons. Red connection indicates the j → i weight in the E population undergoing plasticity. Bottom: Spike generation depends probabilistically on the intensity function Λ( t). Left: A large time delay ∆t

between pre- and postsynaptic spike leads to long-term depression (LTD). Right: A small time delay ∆t causes long-term potentiation (LTP). d. Top: Spike train raster of excitatory (red), inhibitory (blue), and external (black) neurons. Middle: Mean weight dynamics normalized to initial mean weight strength ¯w0 of excitatory ¯wEE and inhibitory weights ¯wEI . Bottom: Dynamics of mean excitatory ( ¯rE (t) = N −1 P 

> j

rjE (t)) and inhibitory firing rates ( ¯rI = N −1 P 

> j

rjI (t)). Solid line is an average over 15 realizations of the spike generation via ⃗ Λ and the shaded area is the standard deviation of the mean. 

with H(s) being a Heaviside function to enforce causality, and e−s/τ α is the postsynaptic ‘current’ for population 

α ∈ { E, I } having time constant τα (we take τE = τX

and τI = 2 τE ). Finally, d⃗M contains the differentials of the NE + NI spike count processes, which takes the value of 1 if a presynaptic neuron spikes over a small interval du , and 0 otherwise. Thus, if a neuron spikes at time u, the spike will contribute e−(t−u)/τ α to the in-tensity functions of other neurons at time t > u . A re-alization of the spike train from neuron i in population 

α ∈ { E, I } is Siα(t) = dM iα/dt = P 

> n

δ(t − tin α ), and we define riα(t) = ⟨Siα(t)⟩, where ⟨·⟩ denotes an expectation over realizations of the spike train generator ⃗ Λ( t).The matrices W and WX are the 2N × 2N recurrent and feedforward synaptic couplings, respectively. The re-current matrix is set as W =

WEE −WEI 

WIE −WII 



, where the individual terms in each block (e.g. WEE ) are ini-tialized with entries ¯w (e.g. ¯wEE ). There are two exter-nal populations ( XE and XI ) which feedforward synapse onto the E and I populations. We set WX to have a diagonal block structure (meaning that pairs of E neu-rons receive common inputs, but an E and I neuron pair does not). The external neurons fire as independent, ho-mogeneous Poisson processes with an intensity function 

ΛαX = aα ≥ 0 with α = {E, I }.In our study, we let the E → E and I → E connec-tions be plastic, while the E → I, I → I, X → E and 

X → I are non-plastic. We model long-term synaptic plasticity based on a Spike-Timing Dependent Plastic-ity (STDP) rule, in which long-term potentiation (LTP) or depression (LTD) depends on the relative timing of pre- and postsynaptic spikes. STDP has been described in a variety of studies and has a rich diversity of forms 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4[22, 74, 75]. We follow past work [76–80] and take the synaptic weight wij Eα between a presynaptic neuron j in population α ∈ { E, I } and a postsynaptic neuron i in the 

E population to evolve according to the STDP rule (see 

Methods ): 

τwα 

dw ij Eα 

dt =

 12 (xiE Sjα + xjαSiE ) − bEα τpSjα



. (1) The timescale of weight dynamics is set by the plasticity rate τwα . Throughout we take τwE = 3 τwI .LTP recruitment is determined from the temporal overlap between pre- and postsynaptic spiking activity. This overlap depends on the eligibility traces xiE (t) and 

xjα(t) which filter spike trains with an exponential decay (Fig. 1b ; Methods): 

τp

dx jα

dt = −xjα(t) + τpSjα(t),

where τp is the eligibility timescale. The form of the LTP terms in the STDP dynamics (the xS terms in Eq. 1) gives an acausal Hebbian rule [28, 81, 82]. Specifically, the ordering of pre- and postsynaptic spikes is unimpor-tant, and near coincident spiking recruits LTP ( Fig. 1b ). Finally, LTD is recruited by isolated presynaptic activity in population α ∈ { E, I } and its magnitude is set by the coefficient bEα .In total, in our network model spikes are stochasti-cally generated based on the intensity function ⃗ Λ( t) and synaptic weights change based on the relative timing of pre- and postsynaptic spikes (see schematic in Fig. 1c ). Simulations of our network lead to approximately asyn-chronous spiking dynamics of recurrent E and I neu-rons ( Fig. 1d; top ). If the initial synaptic weights are strong then both the E → E and the I → E weights de-cay to depressed steady state values ( Fig. 1d; middle ). The depression of synaptic weights is mirrored by the E

and I neuron firing rates converging to moderate values (Fig. 1d; bottom ). 

> Homeostatic compliance of excitatory plasticity

We first consider the plasticity of the I → E con-nections. The LTD coefficient bEI sets a desired tar-get E population firing rate ¯rE (t) = N −1 P 

> i

riE (t).Specifically, the evolution of {wij EI } is such that 

lim t→∞ ⟨¯rE (t)⟩ = bEI (Fig. 1d; bottom ; bEI = 20 Hz). This result is due to the negative feedback loop between the I → E synaptic weights and the E population firing rates. To elaborate, if a postsynaptic neuron i in the E

population has a firing rate riE that is above (below) bEI 

then Eq. (1) is such that the synaptic weights wij EI will potentiate (depress) so as to lower (raise) riE . In this way, the I → E plastic pathway acts as a homeostatic mechanism for firing rate, as has been extensively studied [12, 13, 23, 35, 37, 83]. While I → E plasticity is well known to enact home-ostasis, the impact that the LTD coefficient bEE has on the plasticity dynamics of the E → E pathway is less ex-plored. The E → E pathway cannot homeostatically regulate network activity, because it supports a posi-tive feedback loop between potentiating synaptic weights 

wij EE and growing firing rates rjE and riE . Nevertheless, the form of Eq. (1) for the E → E pathway mirrors that of the I → E pathway. The central goal of our study is to explore the plasticity/network activity dynamics for the symmetric STDP case where bEI = bEE ≡ b. This has been shown in previous work to be necessary for stable learning in feedforward networks [37]. We consider this necessity in recurrent networks. As a first exploration we test how different initial conditions (t = 0) of the mean excitatory weight 

¯wEE (t) = N −2 P 

> ij

wij EE (t) affect the evolution of the network/synaptic dynamics. We find that ¯wEE (t)

asymptotes to an initial condition dependent steady state value ( Fig. 2a ). Further, since the I → E pathway aims to keep the excitatory firing rates at a target value ( b), a higher initial mean excitatory weight, ¯wEE , is balanced by a higher mean inhibitory weight, ¯wEI (Fig. 2b ). In total the network with both E → E and I → E plas-ticity shows a continuum of stable states, often termed a ‘line attractor’, in the ( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI ) phase space ( Fig. 2c ,dashed line). The homeostatic I → E plasticity enforces the E neuron target firing rate to be ¯rjE = b for all synap-tic weight initializations, and consequently I neurons also converge to a fixed rate along the attractor ( Fig. 2d-e ). In the above example the E → E pathway satisfies the constraint bEI = bEE = b, because then ¯rE → b for a range of stable ¯wEE values. Because of this, we say that the excitatory plasticity is homeostatically compli-ant when bEI = bEE .Do line attractor dynamics for the evolution of synap-tic weights require that E → E plasticity be home-ostatically compliant with the I → E plasticity? It is possible to create a stable continuum of ( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI )when the E → E plasticity is a pairwise anti-symmetric (causal) such that LTP and LTD that are exactly bal-anced for all (asynchronous) pre- and postsynaptic ac-tivity ( Supplement Fig. 1a ). Such a rule has no bEE ,but does support a continuum. However, in this case 

dw ij EE /dt ≈ 0 and there is (trivially) no net evolution of 

¯wEE regardless of the E population firing rate. This dy-namic is not strictly a line attractor, because the ¯wEE is not attracted to a particular value. Only the ¯wEI value evolves. Conversely, if E → E LTP and LTD are imbal-anced for all (asynchronous) activity in the asymmetric window, then ¯wEE drifts deterministically, and recurrent excitation cannot settle even if inhibition ( ¯wEI ) has be-gan approaching steady-state ( Supplement Fig. 1b ). Networks employing a more realistic triplet STDP plasticity rule [84, 85] also exhibit E firing rate homeosta-sis with line attractor dynamics ( Supplement Fig. 1c ). While the triplet STDP rule avoids any need for fine-tuning in terms of LTP/LTD balance, the network does 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5(a) (b) (c) 

# (d) (e) (f ) 

FIG. 2. Line attractor in weight space in an EI spiking network. a. Mean E → E weight, ¯wEE , evolution for different initializations (indicated by the line color). b. Mean I → E weight, ¯wEI , evolution over time for the different ¯wEE initialization in panel a. c. Weight dynamics in the ( ¯wEE , ¯wEI ) phase space. Colors are as in panel a, black dots represent the weight after 

20 sec of simulation, and red dashed line (the ‘line attractor’) is a linear regression fit through the black points ( r2 = 0 .99 ). 

d. Mean excitatory firing rate ¯rE (t) = N −1 P 

> j

rjE (t) over time, averaged over 5 trials, for two initial conditions from panel a ( bEI = 20 Hz). e. Mean excitatory ¯rE (top) and inhibitory rates ¯rI (bottom) averaged over 12-17 sec of simulation time. Location on the line attractor parametrized from 0 (lowest steady state weights) to 1 (highest steady state weights) in panel c. Dashed line indicates rate set-point bEI = 20 Hz. f. The variance of the mean excitatory firing rates, Var (¯ rE (t)) as a function of location on the line attractor ( T = x in calculating Var (¯ rE (t)) ). 

rely on the inhibitory and excitatory plasticity thresholds being equal (e.g. bEE = bEI ; Supplement Fig. 1d ). We limit our excitatory plasticity rule to a symmetric pairwise rule, particularly for mathematical simplicity, but many of our mean-field stability results below ex-tend to the asymmetric triplet rule. The bEE = bEI con-straint can be loosened if the bEα terms are themselves allowed to be dynamic [37] ( Supplement Fig. 1e ). In that case, each bEα has a different initial value, but are each low pass filters of the post synaptic firing rate (τb db Eα  

> dt

= −(bEα − rE )), the limiting factor for stability becomes the timescale of which the plasticity thresholds change, τb. In sum, when E → E plasticity is home-ostatically compliant with the I → E plasticity, then ( ¯wEE , ¯wEI ) has continuum, line attractor dynamics. A key observation of our study is that while firing rates are invariant along the line attractor, the dynamic properties of population activity are not. To illustrate, we first consider the dynamic variance of the E popula-tion activity, Var (¯ rE ) = T −1 R t+Tt (¯ rE (s) − b)2ds , where the domain of integration (t, t + T ) is when the synap-tic weights have converged onto the line attractor (so that T −1 R t+Tt ¯rE (s)ds ≈ b) where T = 5 sec. Networks with large synaptic weights ( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI ) have much larger Var (¯ rE ) than those with small weights ( Fig. 2f ). In the next section we will continue to explore how various net-work response properties shift along the synaptic weight line attractor, even while the firing rates (¯ rE , ¯rI ) remain invariant. 

Network response properties along the line attractor 

To probe the response properties along the line attrac-tor, we compare and contrast a network with synaptic weights ( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI ) at the bottom of the line attrac-tor to a network with synaptic weights at the top of the line attractor (purple and orange dots in Fig. 3a ). Once synaptic weight and rate dynamics reach steady state values, we perturb the network by forcing each E

neuron to spike, causing every E neuron synapse to be activated (at time tp). Even though the steady state mean E neuron firing rates are identical for the two net-works (at the homeostatic target rate b), we find they nevertheless show distinct dynamical response properties 

⟨rE (t)⟩ (for tp < t < ∞). The network with weights 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6lower on the line attractor responds to the perturbation with a weak increase in activity, which rapidly dampens (Fig. 3b; top ). By contrast, the network with synap-tic weights high on the line attractor shows an amplified and prolonged dynamical response ( Fig. 3b; bottom ). We measure the integrated squared perturbation network response (or the ‘energy’) for different points along the line attractor: Esim  

> E

= R ∞ 

> tp

(⟨¯rE (s)⟩ − b)2ds . This quan-tifies the sensitivity of the network’s dynamic response. We see along the line that Esim  

> E

grows supra-linearly along the line. Synaptic pairings ( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI ) high on the line attractor produce networks with dynamics that are more sensitive to input perturbations than networks with pair-ings ( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI ) low on the line attractor We also consider the decay time constant τdecay fol-lowing an input perturbation. We assume ¯rE (t) will decay according to an exponential A0e−(t−tp)/τ decay + b

where A0 is the response amplitude at perturbation time 

t = tp. We quantify a relaxation timescale τdecay , such that ⟨¯rE (tp + τdecay )⟩ ≈ b + A0/e . This roughly cor-responds to the amplitude of the decay after a full time constant has elapsed. We likewise see that networks with pairings high on the line exhibit longer lasting perturba-tions than those with pairings low on the line ( Fig. 3d ). We next consider the network balance index, β which is a measure of how tightly inhibition matches correspond-ing excitation [86–88]. We calculate it via: 

β = |IE + II + IX |

IX + IE

,

= | ¯wEE ⟨¯rE ⟩ − ¯wEI ⟨¯rI ⟩ + ¯ wEX aE |

¯wEE ⟨¯rE ⟩ + ¯ wEX aE

.

Here, IE , II , IX correspond to the excitatory, inhibitory, and external currents that the excitatory population re-ceives. A lower β corresponds to a tighter balance, mean-ing that residual input after cancellation of excitatory and inhibitory input is much smaller than the excitatory and inhibitory inputs themselves [86]. In our network, 

β decreases along the line attractor ( Fig. 3e ). This is expected since large synaptic weight ( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI ) values require more cancellation than that required with small synaptic weights. We further observe that β stays above 0.1, which is considered to be in a loose balance regime. Thus, for our chosen network parameters (Table I), our plastic network resides in an operating regime that re-flects realistic cortical activity [86]. We next establish that repeated stimulation can induce assembly learning (growth of ¯wEE ) in the network. We consider a learning protocol in which each neuron in the 

E population is stimulated with brief (30 ms) input arriv-ing periodically at a rate of 0.2Hz ( Fig. 3f ). The mean E

neuron firing rate responds to each pulse ( Fig. 3g ), and over repeated pulses, ¯wEE and ¯wEI increase in strength (Fig. 3h, i ). The synaptic weight increases closely fol-low the line attractor so that the weight changes act like a ratchet, and over the protocol, weight increases build upon past increases. Repeated stimulation of a popula-tion can potentiate ¯wEE and give rise to a strong, stable assembly. Finally, recurrently coupled networks are known to exhibit pattern completion [89–91], which measures the propensity of a network to respond when only a subset of the neurons are stimulated. We test this on the networks that are high or low along the line attractor by stimu-lating 20% of the excitatory neurons. Unsurprisingly, we find that the network higher on the line attractor exhibits a stronger response and thus recruits more unstimulated neurons in the network to respond relative to networks low on the line attractor ( Fig. 3j ). Taken together, these results show that E → E and 

I → E plasticity does more than prevent runaway ex-citation through homeostasis. When E → E plastic-ity is homeostatically compliant, then a line attractor in 

( ¯ wEE , ¯wEI ) space is produced. While by design the mean firing rates are invariant along this line attractor, the re-sponse properties such as energy, decay time, variability, balance index, and pattern completion change systemat-ically. In other words, position along the synaptic line attractor ‘parameterizes’ how strongly and how persis-tently a given excitatory population reacts to transient perturbation, even though its mean baseline activity is indistinguishable across the line attractor. This suggests a natural way for the same assembly to exist in multiple, graded forms: networks at different points on the line en-code the sensitivity or salience of a learned pattern, not just its presence or absence [9, 64]. 

> Mean-field model of the synaptic weight line attractor

To gain a more rigorous description of the line attractor in synaptic weight space and understand how it shapes population dynamics, we derive and analyze a mean-field model of the spiking/synaptic network activity. We first assume that the network is in an asynchronous regime, and that the dynamics of ⃗ Λ( t) are much faster than the evolution of the synaptic weights W(t) (i.e τr ≪ τwα ). On the fast timescale of network activity we de-rive mean-field equations for the population and trial-averaged activity ( Fig. 4a ): 

rα(t) = 1

N N trial 

> Ntrial

X

> mN

X

> i

rim α (t),

for large N and Ntrial . For the Hawkes process network model, the mean firing rates of the excitatory and in-hibitory populations, ⃗r = [ rE , r I ]T , obey the following 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 

# (f) (g) (h) (j) (i) 

FIG. 3. Response properties as a function of location on the line attractor. a. Two example networks on the line attractor, one low (purple dot) and one high (orange dot). b. Example realization of mean E firing rates ¯rE (t) in response to a 2ms pulse stimulus at tp = 6 .8 sec perturbing the network low on the line attractor (top) or high on the line attractor (bottom). 

c. The integrated squared perturbation, or the energy EE , as a function of networks on different locations on the line attractor. 

d. Decay time constant τdecay to a perturbation as a function of networks as a function of networks on different locations on the line attractor. e. Balance index as a function of networks at different locations on the line attractor. f. Schematic of the learning paradigm. g. Mean excitatory rate ¯rE response to the series of pulses over time. h. Mean normalized synaptic weights ¯wEE / ¯w0 (top) and ¯wEI / ¯w0 (bottom) dynamics during the learning paradigm. i. ( ¯wEE , ¯wEI ) phase space during the learning paradigm. j. Mean excitatory rate ¯rE for network low (top, purple) and high (bottom, orange) on the line when only 20% of the network is stimulated. 

linear system ( Appendix A ): ⃗τ r

d⃗ rdt = −⃗r + W⃗r + W X⃗r X , (2) 

W = N

wEE −wEI 

wIE −wII 



,

WX = N

wEX 00 wIX 



.

The timescales of the respective population dynamics are ⃗τ r = [ τE , τ I ], while ⃗r X = [ aE , a I ] are the external drives onto each population. To distinguish between numerical and mean-field estimates of population activity, we will continue to use the ’bar’ notation, ¯wαβ and ¯rα, to indi-cate connectivity and activity calculated from numerical simulations of the Hawkes processes model, while wαβ 

and rα will denote solutions from our mean-field the-ory. Further, we use the notation that bolded matrices (e.g. W) correspond to full dimensional network, where script matrices (e.g. W) denote the reduced mean field network. On the slower learning timescale we follow previous studies [77, 80] and derive evolution equations for the mean synaptic plasticity dynamics ( Appendix B ) as: 

τwE 

dw EE 

dt = τprE (rE − b) + O (1 /N ) ,τwI 

dw EI 

dt = τprI (rE − b) + O (1 /N ) . (3) Here the O (1 /N ) term corresponds to the role pairwise spike time correlations would play on the plasticity rules, which for large N we can consider negligible in the cur-rent network setup. If the firing rate of the excitatory population rE is above the threshold b, the mean E → E

weight wEE and the mean I → E weight wEI will po-tentiate (LTP), while the weights depress (LTD) other-wise ( Fig. 4b ). Since for each plasticity rule the weight change is multiplied by the firing rate of the respective population, the I → E plasticity rule has a linear de-pendency on rE , while the E → E rule has a quadratic dependency. Similar dependencies in which the sign and magnitude of E → E plasticity depend on excitatory fir-

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8E I

# (a) (c) (b) (f ) (e) (d) (g) (h) 

FIG. 4. Synaptic weight line attractor in a mean-field model. a. Schematic of the mean-field model. An excitatory ( E)and inhibitory ( I) population are coupled via synaptic weights wαβ and receive external input via aE and aI . b. Schematic for the E → E (red) and I → E (blue) rate-dependent plasticity rule. Weights potentiate for excitatory firing rates rE

above b = 20 Hz (LTP) while depressing otherwise (LTD). c. The region of stable rate dynamics is framed from below by 

wEI = − (1+ N w II )(1 −N w EE )  

> N2wIE

(black dashed line), and from the right by wEE < (τE +τI +N τ E wII )(N τ I ) (not shown). From the top and the right, the space is constrained by boundaries for which firing rates would become negative (dotted black lines). For r∗ 

> E

= 0 ,we have the boundary wEI = aE wEX (1+ N w II )  

> aIN w IX

and for rI ∗ = 0 , the boundary is wEE = aE N w EX wIE +aI wIX    

> wIX aIN

. The collection of these boundaries define a region of stable firing rates, which is indicated by the pink trapezoid in (wEE , w EI ) space. The green and orange dots are networks which exhibits stable and unstable dynamics, respectively. d. E firing rates of the mean-field model (dark colors) and the Hawkes process network model (light colors) for the two weight pairings indicated in panel c (stable is green; unstable is orange). Firing rates from the Hawkes process network model are averaged across the population over 20 trials. e. Same as panel c, overlayed with flow field of wEI and wEE weight dynamics. Blue line indicates the line attractor, black solid line is an example trajectory which started from the red dot. f. E → E ¯wEE (light red) and I → E ¯wEI (light blue) weight dynamics over time for the simulation. Dark red and blue are for the mean-field synaptic weights. g. Excitatory 

¯rE (light red) and inhibitory ¯rI (light blue) firing rate dynamics over time for the simulation. Dark red and blue are for the mean-field firing rates. h. Line attractor for different external drive onto the E population ( aE = 10 , 20 , 30 Hz). Green lines are from the mean-field model, and red dashed lines from the Hawkes process network model (linear fits, r2 values are .995, .9998 and .9998). Dotted green lines indicate bounds of zero firing rates. 

ing rates have been found in experimental studies [92–94]. We start by investigating the dynamics of the fast sys-tem. The separation of timescales allows us to assume that synaptic weights are effectively fixed as firing rates reach their steady states ( Appendix C 1 ). Solving for 

rE and rI at equilibrium (i.e d⃗ r/dt =⃗ 0 in Eq. 2) yields: ⃗r ∗ = ( I − W)−1WX⃗r X . (4) Eq. (4) is only a valid solution for matrices W that permit a stable steady state firing rate ⃗r ∗. We identify the region in weight space (wEE , w EI ) where the firing rate dynam-ics are stable (Fig. 4c; pink region) . We use the sta-ble/unstable characterization to validate that our mean-field model is an accurate quantitative description of the spiking dynamics ( Fig. 4d ; compare dark orange/green to light orange/green traces). To study the slow synaptic weight dynamics, we con-sider equilibrium solutions for wEα (i.e dw Eα /dt = 0 in Eq. 3), and we assume that the fast system (firing rates) is in the stable regime and has reached steady state. In this case the I → E pathway enacts homeostatic control such that r∗ 

> E

= b. We find that stable weight configura-tions are described in the large N limit by ( Appendix C 2 ): 

w∗ 

> EI

= wII (bw ∗ 

> EE

+ aE wEX )

bw IE + aI wIX 

. (5) Since w∗ 

> EI

depends linearly on w∗ 

> EE

, this corresponds to a line attractor in (wEE , w EI ) weight space, similar 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9to that observed in the Hawkes process spiking model (Fig. 2c ). Our mean-field approach reveals how the slope and intercept point of the line attractor depend on the (non-plastic) I → I and E → I weight strengths (wII and wIE ), E and I input parameters ( aE wEX and 

aI wIX ) and the plasticity threshold b. The system in Eq. (3) defines a flow field ( Fig. 4e ) and, similar to the Hawkes process model, the mean synaptic weights evolve to a steady state ( Fig. 4f ) which sits along the line at-tractor. Further, while on the line attractor, the E popu-lation has a mean firing rate of b = 20 Hz ( Fig. 4g ). We confirm that the mean-field estimate of the line attractor matches the line attractor found in the Hawkes process model by changing one example parameter (the external drive onto excitatory neurons, aE ). Increases in aE re-sult in a larger regime of stable firing rates, resulting in an upwards shift of the line attractor, like in the Hawkes process model ( Fig. 4h ). 

> Conditions for line attractor dynamics

The full system of dynamic firing rates and synaptic weights can co-evolve so that rE → b and (wEE , w EI )

converge onto the line attractor, however this is not guar-anteed for all network and plasticity parameters. We require two conditions to be met. First, the line of fixed points must be stable (i.e., a line attractor in-stead of a line repeller). Second, the initial conditions of (wEE , w EI ) must be in the basin of attraction of the line attractor. 

> Stability

Using linear stability analysis, we identify two regimes in which the line of fixed points is an attractor (Appendix D, see also [54]). First, stability is guar-anteed if we satisfy (in the large N limit) the condition: 

wII <

r τwE 

τwI 

wIE . (6) It should be noted here that choosing faster inhibitory than excitatory plasticity dynamics, as is often assumed in previous studies (e.g. [37, 95]), as well as in our case where τwE /τ wI = 3 , can ensure stable dynamics, though it is not a necessary condition. Here, we see this condition constrains two properties of the network: 1) timescales of the plasticity rules, and 2) circuit properties through weak or strong inhibitory feedback. For example, if in-hibitory plasticity were slow, the circuit would need to maintain strong E → I feedback or weak I → I inhibi-tion to remain stable. If Condition (6) is not met, line attractor dynamics can still occur if the plasticity thresh-old b fulfills a second inequality (in the large N limit): 

b < wIX aI

q τwE 

> τwI

wII −

q τwE  

> τwI

wIE 

≡ bmax . (7) Condition (7) defines the maximum threshold bmax that supports line attractor dynamics, which was unbounded when Condition (6) was met. We can visualize these two conditions in (wIE , w II )

parameter space ( Fig. 5a ). The grey region represents when the line of fixed points is always an attractor for any b (regime 1), while the colored region admits line at-tractor dynamics for b < b max (regime 2). The red, pink, and purple dots represent three different choices of wIE 

used in subsequent panels. In regime 1, Condition (6) is satisfied, so bmax is unbounded, denoted by the blue shaded region ( Fig. 5b ). In regime 2, Condition (7) must be met, and bmax rapidly decreases as wEI decreases (or-ange shaded region) ( Fig. 5b ). Recall that the plasticity threshold b is the homeostatic setpoint of the E firing rate, hence it defines the firing rate of the E population on the line attractor ( r∗ 

> E

= b). Thus, while in regime 2, even if dynamics are stable, steady state firing rates will be constrained. In total, the non-plastic weights wIE and 

wII together with the plasticity timescales define whether the line of fixed points is an attractor (and not a repeller). The exact location on the line attractor, (wEE , w EI )

determines the degree of linear stability. We quantify this by calculating the eigenvalues of the slow system (Appendix D). For a line attractor, one eigenvalue is always zero and the other non-zero. If the real part of the non-zero eigenvalue ( λnz ) is negative, the dynamics are stable; and unstable otherwise ( Fig. 5c ). The red, pink, and purple curves represent the red dot (stable in regime 1), magenta dot (stable in regime 2) and purple dot (unstable in regime 2) ( Fig. 5a,b ). Specifically, if the system is in one of the stable regimes that fulfill ei-ther Condition 6 (red line) or Condition 7 (pink line), the real part of λnz is negative and decreases as a func-tion of location on the line attractor. When choosing 

b > b max (purple line), the attractor becomes a repeller, and the slow system is unstable. It’s notable that while it appears the slow system becomes more stable high up on the line (e.g. the eigenvalues become more negative), suggesting more stable dynamics, the fast system is be-coming increasingly unstable. This drives the eventual unstable dynamics at the rate stability boundaries (as well as a breakdown in fast-slow decomposition). 

> Basin of attraction

To gain a deeper understanding of how the line attrac-tor changes its properties, we investigate the dependence of the line attractor and its flow fields for decreasing val-ues of wIE , effectively moving across the different stabil-ity conditions ( Fig. 5a ; red, pink and purple dots). De-

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 (a) (b) (c) (e) (d) (f ) 

FIG. 5. Basin of attraction of the line attractor in the mean-field model. a. The upper bound on the plasticity threshold, bmax for the line of fixed points to be an attractor. The grey region denotes there is no upper bound (regime 1). Yellow to blue color indicates the finite and decreasing bmax (regime 2). Red, pink, and purple dots indicate parameter choices in subsequent panels. b. bmax as a function of the non-plastic I → I (wII ) and E → I (wIE ) weights. c. The real part of the nonzero eigenvalue of the weight dynamics Re [λ] as a function of the location along the line of fixed points. Colors indicate regimes from panel A. d. Flow field of wEE and wEI weight dynamics in regime 1. Blue line indicates the line attractor, black dotted lines indicate r∗ 

> E

= 0 and r∗ 

> I

= 0 , black dashed line separates stable from unstable firing rate dynamics, and the green line is the stable manifold of the non-hyperbolic fixed point (red star at r∗ 

> E

= r∗ 

> I

= 0 ). Blue shaded areas are basins of attraction for the line attractor, and red shaded areas are regions where weights do not converge to the line attractor. e. Same as d for lower value of wIE in regime 2, and b < b max . f. Same as d and e for a lower value of wIE in regime 2, and b > b max .

creasing wIE increases the slope of the line attractor fol-lowing Eq. (5), consequently reducing the area of attrac-tor dynamics in (wEE , w EI ) space ( Fig. 5d-f ). The area of stable rate dynamics can be further separated into two regions. A basin of attraction region where weight dy-namics will converge to the line of fixed points ( Fig. 5d ;blue area) and a region where weight dynamics do not converge to the line attractor ( Fig. 5d ; red area). In regime 1 ( Fig. 5a ; red dot), the basin of attraction is bounded to the right by the firing rate stability bound-ary (black dashed line) and from above by the r∗ 

> E

= 0 

line (black dotted line). To the left, it is bounded by trajectories that ultimately converge to wEE = 0 . Some trajectories within the trapezoidal region to the right of the line attractor do not necessarily converge on the line. This is likely due to a breakdown of timescale separa-tion as the blue diagonal and black vertical dashed lines are firing rate stability boundaries. Decreasing wIE into regime 2 shrinks the basin of attraction. It is now addi-tionally bounded to the right by a separatrix ( Fig. 5e ;green line), where trajectories to the left of separatrix converge to the line attractor, while trajectories to the right diverge away from the attractor. Decreasing wIE 

further into the unstable regime ( Fig. 5a ; purple dot) removes the basin of attraction entirely because the sep-aratrix moves past the line attractor, leading to a fully unstable line of fixed points, a line ‘repeller’ ( Fig. 5f ; see 

Appendix E for details). The above conditions on the plasticity threshold also hold if we use I → E and E → E plasticity rules that are a cubic (as opposed to the current quadratic form) func-tion of the post-synaptic firing rates. This has been stud-ied in the context of mean-field dynamics for the triplet rule [37, 96], in which triplets of spikes determine the evo-lution of synaptic potentiation. The above constraints on the plasticity threshold hold given these rules, suggesting generalizability of the linear attractor stability for home-ostatic rules ( Appendix F for details). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 (a) (e) (d) (c) (b) 

# (f ) (j) (i) (h) (g) 

FIG. 6. Network response properties vary along the synaptic weight line attractor in the mean-field model. a. 

Two example networks with different initial conditions along the line attractor, one low (purple dot) and one high (orange). Traces of E population response to a perturbation are plotted along the line for corresponding coordinates on the line attractor. 

b. Upon receiving a perturbation, the network with weaker coupling has a short, rapid response. Dark purple is theory, light purple is simulations of the Hawkes process network. c. The network with stronger recurrent coupling has a stronger rebound in response. Dark orange is theory. Light orange is simulation. d. We parametrize location on the line attractor varying from 0 to 1 starting with where the line attractor crosses wEE = 0 to the coordinate {r∗ 

> E

= 0 , r ∗ 

> I

= 0 }. The energy, EE , grows along the line attractor for theory (black solid) and simulations (black dashed) along the line attractor. e. The relaxation time to a perturbation, τdecay , grows along the line attractor for theory (black solid) and simulations (black dashed). f. The balance index decreases monotonically for both theory and sim on the line, indicating a tightening of E/I balance. g. Autocorrelation function of the mean activity of the E population in simulation for different positions on the line h. Same as g but for theory. i. 

The trial-to-trial variability , Var [rE ], grows nonlinearly along the line attractor for theory (black solid) and sim (black dashed) along the line attractor. j. The signal to noise ratio grows non-monotonically on the line attractor. 

Calculating the network response properties in the mean-field model 

Through simulation of the Hawkes process network, we showed that different locations on the line attractor have different dynamical response properties ( Fig. 3 ). We turn to the mean-field model to give mechanistic insight into their origin. To begin, we perform perturbations of the steady state 

E population for networks with synaptic weights along the line attractor ( Fig. 6a ). For (wEE , w EI ) pairings that are low on the attractor we observe small and short-lived responses ( Fig. 6b ), while for (wEE , w EI ) pairings that are high on the attractor there are large and long-lived responses ( Fig. 6c ). Our mean-field model well describes the transient population rate dynamics from the Hawkes process model ( Fig. 6b,c ; compare dark col-ored lines and light colored lines). We aim to use our mean-field theory to give mechanistic insight into these results. Consider the implicit solution for our mean-field net-work activity: ⃗r (t) = W[⃗g ∗⃗r ]( t) + WX [⃗g ∗⃗r X ]( t).

Moving to Fourier space and solving for ⃗ r (f ) =R ∞−∞ ⃗r (t)e−2πif t dt yields: ⃗r (f ) = ∆( f )⃗g (f )WX⃗r X (f ),

where we have introduced the frequency-dependent prop-agator: 

∆( f ) = ( I − W⃗g (f )) −1.

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 The propagator defines how activity reverberates through the network after being filtered by synaptic dynamics (⃗g (f )). It is the central object governing both response dynamics and variability [97–101]. Once 

∆( f ) is known, (i) network stability, (ii) perturbation responses properties, (iii) the network balance index, (iv) dynamical and trial-to-trial variability of population responses, and (v) signal to noise ratio can all be expressed in terms of ∆( f ) or its eigenvalues. Histor-ically, linear response theory has used the propagator to understand these properties in networks of fixed connectivity [97, 98, 100]. We will focus our study on how different synaptic weight pairings (wEE , w EI ) along the line attractor determine the propagator ∆( f ), and hence affect the dynamical response properties of the 

EI network (see Methods ). 

Network equilibrium and stability. We first remark that the zero frequency ( f = 0 ) mode gives us the equi-librium firing rates in terms of the propagator: ⃗r ∗ = ∆(0) WX⃗r ∗ 

> X

.

For ( wEE , w EI ) pairings that are on the weight line at-tractor, the firing rates ⃗r are invariant ( Fig. 2 ), making ⃗r ∗ quantity invariant (and equal to b when on the synap-tic weight line attractor). The stability of ⃗r ∗ can also be understood through the propagator ∆( f ). As wEE and wEI grow so does ∆( f ),meaning the reverberations throughout the network be-come stronger, and compromise stability of ⃗r ∗. Indeed, as ∆( f ) grows, the spectral radius ρ(⃗g (f )W) approaches 1, after which the rate dynamics become unstable since 

det[ I −⃗g (f )W] ≥ 0. We can obtain the same stability conditions for the fast system with the propagator as those found from traditional linear stability analysis (Appendix G 1 ). 

Dynamical response. We next consider how the cir-cuit responds to a perturbation of the E population activity. Perturbing around the equilibrium solution gives a closed-form relationship between an injected pul-satile input δ⃗ u(t) = Aδ (t)⃗v (⃗v = [1 , 0]) and the re-sulting rate perturbation δ⃗ r (t) = ⃗r (t) −⃗r ∗. The time evolution of a perturbation depends on the propagator 

δr = (∆( t) − δ(t)I) ∗ δu (Appendix G 2 ). We can use these perturbation evolution equations to calculate the time-integrated squared response EE =R ∞ 

> 0

δr E (t)2dt (see Appendix G 3 ). As previously dis-cussed, this measures the size of the perturbation over time: it is large when the response is either big, long-lasting, or both. We find that EE ∝ A2N 2 

> 2

( N w 3 

> EE
> 1−N w EE

+

wEI ) , and when written in terms of the time domain propagator we have: 

EE = A2

Z ∞

> 0+

|∆EE (t) − δ(t)|2 dt. 

The energy EE grows as (wEE , w EI ) moves upward along the line attractor ( Fig. 6d) . By integrating over the propagator, EE quantifies the total reverberatory strength of the perturbation in the excitatory popula-tion. We next characterize how quickly the evoked activity relaxes back to baseline after the perturbation. Return-ing to the expression of the perturbation evolution in Fourier space, the propagator can be written in terms of the stability matrix J = diag ( τE , τ I )−1 (W − I) (see 

Appendix G 4 ): 

∆( f )⃗g (f ) diag ( ⃗τ r ) = ( i2πf I⃗τ r − J)−1.

Here ∆( f )⃗g (f ) diag ( ⃗τ r ) and J share the same eigenvec-tors, meaning they project perturbations in activity space along the same directions though with different magni-tudes (e.g. different eigenvalues). If the eigenvalues of 

−diag (τE , τ I )−1∆(0) −1 are χ(0) , then we have the decay time (See Appendix G 5 ): 

τdecay = − 1max k Re [ χk(0)] .

In the case that τE = τI , this expression is even simpler as the eigenvalue of the propagator is directly proportional to the relaxation time: τdecay = τr max  

> k

Re 



eig k[∆(0)] 



.We have that 

τdecay ∝ 11 − wEE 

+ √wEI ,

giving τdecay explicitly in terms of (wEE , w EI ). Indeed, 

τdecay increases when moving further up the line attrac-tor, in good agreement with the Hawkes process network model ( Fig. 6e ). 

Balance index. In terms of the propagator, the balance index is written as: 

β = 1 − wEI ∆EI (0) 1 + wEE ∆EE (0) .

Here ∆EE and ∆EI correspond to the EE and EI 

entries in the propagator, respectively (Appendix G 6 ). β decreases along the line attractor ( Fig. 6f ), showing via the propagator and synaptic weights how in-hibitory inputs grow faster than excitation along the line. 

Co-variability and fluctuations. The propagator also gives insight into the magnitude and temporal structure of the co-fluctuations of neural activity across the pop-ulation. The autocorrelation function of the simulated 

E population activity ¯rE (t) displays a clear progression along the synaptic weight line attractor: its amplitude in-creases, and its excursions at nonzero lags become larger when moving up the line attractor ( Fig. 6g ; purple to orange traces). Using the covariance of firing rates for the Hawkes process (see Appendix G 8 ), we derive the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 mean-field cross spectrum (the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function) (see Appendix G 9 ): 

CΛΛ (f ) = ∆



W⃗g (f ) D0

N⃗ g(−f )WT + WX⃗g (f )CX (f )WTX⃗g (−f )



∆T .

Here ⃗ g (f ) is the Fourier transform of the exponential synaptic kernel filter in the Hawkes process, D0 is the diagonal 2×2 matrix of the firing rates, and CX (f ) is the Fourier transform of the mean-field cross-correlation for the external population, which is CX (f ) = 

 aE 

> NX

00 aI

> NX



.The inverse Fourier transform of the EE component of 

CΛΛ (f ) gives a mean-field theory estimate of the autocor-relation function of rE (t). It shows similar dependency of its shape on the position along the weight line attrac-tor as the Hawkes process network (compare Fig. 6g and 

Fig. 6h ). Crucially, this dependency is through the prop-agator, because the input correlation structure ( CX (f ))and the recurrent firing rates (D0) do not change along the line, while the propagator ∆( f ) does. Finally, we can quantify the trial-to-trial vari-ability of the population-averaged firing rates along the line attractor, as in the previous section (Fig. 2f ). Mathematically, this corresponds to the zero-lag Fourier transform of the cross-spectrum, 

C(τ = 0) = R ∞−∞ C(f )e2πif 0df = R ∞−∞ C(f )df = Var[ rE ].Upon moving up the line attractor, ∆( f ) becomes large as the spectral radius, ρ(⃗g (f )W) approaches 1 (at which point, the rate dynamics become unstable). Thus trial-to-trial variability grows when moving further up the line attractor( Fig. 6i ). 

Signal to Noise Ratio. The preceding analysis showed that the propagator amplifies both evoked responses (i.e. signal) and the ongoing co-fluctuations of neuronal ac-tivity (i.e. noise). Since both signal and noise are gov-erned by the same operator ∆( f ), a natural question is which grows faster along the line attractor. That is, as responses become larger along the line attractor, do they become more reliable? To investigate we compute the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR): 

SN R = δr 0

> E

pVar[r E] .

Here δr 0 

> E

is the peak amplitude response to the perturba-tion. The SNR is non-monotonic along the line, reaching a peak a little before halfway up the line ( Fig. 6j ). In-tuitively, we can understand why this occurs. The vari-ance increases supra-linearly ( Fig. 6i ), while the gain in-creases linearly ( Appendix G 2 ). Initially, Var [ rE ] in-creases very slowly along the line, allowing peak response amplitude (signal) to dominate. Eventually though, the rapid growth of variability dominates as the propagator approaches its singularity. Along the line, these coupled effects imply a tradeoff: stronger assemblies (stronger and longer response) are accompanied by larger shared fluctuations. The result-ing nonmonotonic SNR highlights an intermediate regime where responses, and thus recurrent amplification of net-work activity, are large yet remain comparatively reliable, before variability diverges near the stability boundary. This suggests there is an intermediate "sweet spot" in which a network response will be optimally coherent rela-tive to the ongoing co-fluctuations, and challenges the no-tion that stronger synaptic connections are always func-tionally beneficial for an assembly. In fact, if all external neurons are perturbed and forced to spike (as opposed to the recurrent neurons in the previous analyses), the SNR decreases monotonically. If the goal is to amplify a signal from a perturbed external source, then then stronger con-nectivity will not make the signal clearer ( Supplement Fig.S2 ). 

> Effect of Correlations on the line attractor weight dynamics

Networks of spiking neurons can operate in one of two distinct dynamical regimes: the asynchronous state or the correlated state . The extent to which the cortex is in either of these state is debated, but both are pervasive [70, 102, 103]. So far, we have considered our network to be in the asynchronous state, characterized by the absence of significant correlations between spike trains (Fig. 1d ). However, neuronal circuits in vivo can also op-erate in the correlated state [70, 104, 105]. Correlations between spike trains typically either follow from strong recurrent connections [12, 98, 99, 106], intrinsic plasticity via elevated excitability [107, 108], or common external input [70, 75]. Because Hebbian plasticity strengthens synapses between co-active neurons, these spike train cor-relations can become sufficiently large to further shape wiring [96, 109, 110]. Thus, we next ask how correlations affect the weight dynamics and the existence of a line attractor in weight space. In order to do this, we consider external synchronous fluctuations as the source of pairwise correlations in our model. We add a shared Ornstein–Uhlenbeck (OU) com-ponent ηα(t) to the intensity functions of the external populations of either ΛEX or ΛIX (Fig. 7a ): 

ΛαX (t) = [ aα + ηα(t)] +,τη

dη α

dt = −ηα(t) + ση ξα(t).

Here α ∈ { E, I }, ξα(t) is a Gaussian white noise process, 

τη and ση are the respective time constant and inten-sity of the OU process, and [·]+ is a rectifier function. The process ηα(t) models a temporal inhomogeneity in the firing rates of the individual external neurons, mak-ing the external spike trains SiαX (t) a doubly stochastic process [111, 112]. The fact that ηα(t) is shared among all external spike trains driving population α will cause 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 significant correlations in the external inputs to pairs of neurons ( Fig. 7b ). These increased correlations result in spiking synchrony, which can be seen in the raster plot after adding the OU process ( Fig. 7c ). Without external correlations ( ση = 0), the mean synaptic weights, ¯wEE and ¯wEI all reach a steady state on the line ( Fig. 7d ; dashed lines). By contrast, when external inputs are correlated (ση = 0 .5) , resulting in sig-nificant pairwise E spiking correlations, there is a posi-tive deterministic drift in the mean synaptic weights ¯wEE 

and ¯wEI (Fig. 7d ; solid lines). This suggests that the line attractor dynamics present for ση = 0 are no longer in effect. Indeed, this drift eventually drives the net-work towards instability ( Fig. 7d ; solid lines at t ≈ 80s). However, before the network activity becomes unstable the mean firing rates remain fixed because of the home-ostatic control through wEI dynamics ( Fig. 7e ). This suggests that while the weights are drifting in the net-work with correlated spiking activity, they are drifting along what is the line attractor for the asynchronous net-work ( Fig. 7f ). We remark that in the previous results in our Hawkes process network model ( Figs. 1, 2 ), this (slow) drift was absent because we focused our analysis on intermediate timescales ( ∼30s). Longer timescales, however, reveal that the Hawkes process network is not perfectly asynchronous, but that the recurrent E weights induce weak pairwise correlations [80]. To understand this drift in weight space, we extend the mean-field model to accommodate spike train cor-relations following previously published approaches [80]. The weight dynamics in the mean-field model now de-pend on additional terms (see Appendix B and G 9 

for details): 

τwα 

dw Eα 

dt = τprα(rE − b)+

Z ∞−∞ 

eK(f )CEα (f )df 



,

(8) where α ∈ { E, I }. Here eK = F[e−t/τ p H(t)]( f ) is the Fourier transform of the STDP kernel, which is convolved with the spike train cross spectrum of the recurrent units 

CEα (f ). This term scales as O(N −1) in the asynchronous regime, and can be thus neglected in the large N limit (see Eq. 3). However, in the correlated regime the term does not vanish in the large N limit and must be consid-ered. The mean-field spike-count cross-spectrum of the network is: 

CEα (f ) = ∆( f )

 D0

N + WX⃗g(f )CX (f )WTX⃗g (−f )



∆( −f )T ,

with ∆ = (1 − W⃗g (f )) −1 being the propagator as defined in the past section, and D0 is the diagonal matrix of the mean firing rates. Note, CEα refers to the spike-count cross spectrum, whereas in the previous section, we used the intensity function cross spectrum CΛΛ for the trial-to-trial variability. The former conveys the spike-train correlations, while the latter conveys the correlations of the underlying firing rates. The function CX (f ) is the Fourier Transform of the mean-field cross correlation for the external population, defined as: 

CX (f ) = σ2

> η

1 + (2 πf τ η )2

 1 0 0 1 



.

We note that CX (f ) = 0 if ση = 0 .Correlations induce a drift in (wEE , w EI ) space through the integral term in the (Eq. 8). This drift de-stroys the synaptic weight line attractor observed in the asynchronous state. This is because the first term in Eq. (8) dominates the initial dynamics, and upon reach-ing the line attractor defined for ση = 0 (where rE ≈ b),the contribution of the first term is close to zero. Thus, subsequent dynamics are due to the correlation term, re-sulting in a deterministic drift, while firing rate home-ostasis is maintained. The drift is positive because the integral of the STDP kernel is positive and the pairwise correlations are positive. We plot the mean synaptic wEE 

weight for different noise amplitude ( ση ) values, where this drift becomes faster as ση increases for both the mean-field model ( Fig. 7g ; solid lines) and the Hawkes process network model ( Fig. 7g ; dashed lines). Finally, we calculate the ∆wEE over a window of time where wEE 

increases linearly (25 and 75 seconds). We see the drift grows supra-linearly with σ, matching well between sim-ulations of the Hawkes process and associated mean-field theory ( Fig. 7h ). In summary, inducing spike train correlations in the re-current network via external shared fluctuations to each population causes drift in the synaptic weights along where the line attractor would exist if correlations were absent. Accounting for pairwise spike time correlations in our mean-field model can capture the dynamics of the deterministic drift in synaptic weights. If this drift is left unchecked, it will lead to an explosion of E weights and rates. This seriously undermines the ability of the net-work to store information and maintain persistent pop-ulation activity. In the final section, we will present one possible solution to overcome this unbounded drift in the presence of pairwise correlations. 

> Correlations between E and I cells can mitigate synaptic weight Drift

In cortical circuits, it is well established that both exci-tatory and inhibitory neuronal populations often receive common inputs, such as shared thalamic or intracortical drive in sensory cortices [88, 113]. This has been shown to drive the system back towards asynchrony [108]. We induce correlations across E and I neurons by correlating their external populations via their intensity functions: 

ΛαX (t) = [ aα + √cX ηs(t) + p(1 − cX )ηα(t)] +.

Here, ηs(t) and ηα(t) are OU processes, and cX is the cor-relation coefficient between these external inputs, which 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 (b) (a) (c) (d) 

# (f) (e) (g) (h) 

FIG. 7. The effect of correlated spiking activity on synaptic weight dynamics. a. Schematic of the recurrent EI 

network where neurons in the external populations XE and XI receive a shared common fluctuating input ( ηE (t) and ηI (t)). 

b. Two neurons from the external population driving the E population with intensity functions ΛiEX and ΛjEX receive common fluctuating input ηα(t). c. Spike train raster plot of E (red), I (blue), and X (black) neurons. Vertical black line marks the time point when correlations are applied ( ση = 4 ). d. Weight dynamics without ( ση = 0 , dotted lines) and with fluctuating inputs ( ση = 0 .5, solid lines) for E (red) and I (blue) weights. e. Firing rate dynamics for networks with common fluctuating inputs applied to E (red) and I (blue) rates ( ση = 0 .5). f. Weight dynamics in the ( wEE , w EI ) phase space without ( σ = 0 ,black) and with common fluctuating inputs ( ση = 0 .5, purple line). The blue line marks the line attractor when ση = 0 . g. 

Change of normalized ¯wEE over time for different values of amplitudes ση . Dashed colored lines indicate the Hawkes process network model, while solid lines indicate the mean-field model. h. Drift rate of wEE as a function of correlation strength ση

for the Hawkes process model (blue) and the associated mean-field model (black). 

sets the proportion of the noise that is shared or private between the E and I populations ( Fig. 8a,b ). For sim-plicity, they have the same noise intensity ση . This re-sults in a new external correlation structure in the mean-field model of the form: 

CX (f ) = σ2

> η

1 + (2 πf τ η )2

 1 cX

cX 1



.

Adding shared fluctuations to the E and I populations leads to a reduction of pairwise E → E spike time correla-tions (see spike train raster in Fig.8c ). The drift in mean weight dynamics observed with only private correlations (Fig. 8d ; purple curve) is suppressed when the correla-tions are shared between E and I populations ( Fig. 8d ;green curve). For both simulations of the Hawkes process network ( Fig. 8e , dashed curves) and associated mean-field theory ( Fig. 8e , solid curves), we see the slope of the ¯wEE evolution gets smaller as cX approaches one (Fig. 8e ).Indeed, when cX = 1 the drift is similar to that seen in the case of ση = 0 (when pairwise correla-tions are negligible). Finally, we find the drift rate mono-tonically decreases as cX varies from 0 to 1 for both the-ory ( Fig.8f , black curve) and Hawkes process simulations (Fig.8f , blue curves). In summary, by sharing the fluctuations to the E and 

I populations, we induce a cancellation of the external correlations projecting onto the E population by the re-current I population fluctuations onto the E population. As a result, for large cX the spike time activity of the E

and I populations are in a rough asynchronous regime. Because of this the stability of weight dynamics is sim-ilar to the case when external inputs are uncorrelated (ση = 0 ). 

III. DISCUSSION 

A central question in assembly learning is: how can recurrent circuits turn transient correlated activity into a stable, strongly coupled circuit? In the clas-sic cell-assembly picture, co-active excitatory neurons strengthen their recurrent connections, making future 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 (a) (b) (c) 

# (e) (f) (d) 



FIG. 8. Correlations to both E and I populations can mitigate synaptic weight drift. a. Schematic of the network when the external inputs to E and I populations are now correlated. The parameter cX denotes the proportion of input shared to the external populations which activate E and I together. b. Schematic of the ensemble in which the fluctuating inputs can now be shared between the external populations which synapse onto E and I. I → E connections (blue) and E → E

connections (red) between example pairs of neurons can potentiate or depress. c. Spiking raster of E (red), I (blue), and X

(black) neurons. Vertical black line indicates when correlations between E and I with cX = 1 are activated. d. Traces of the mean synaptic weights in (wEE , w EI ) phase space showing drift towards the instability when correlated inputs to E and I are purely private ( cX = 0 , purple curve) vs shared ( cX = 1 , green curve). e. As cX increases from 0 to 1, the drift is mitigated, so the mean synaptic weight drifts less and less. f. Drift for simulations of the Hawkes process network (blue) and associated mean-field theory (black). 

co-activation more likely and thereby allow a stimulus, memory, or task variable to be encoded. However, the same positive feedback that makes assemblies responsive to inputs also makes them potentially unstable: recurrent excitation can amplify activity, correlations, and future synaptic potentiation. Thus, proper assembly learning cannot be simply forming strong E → E connections, but must involve maintaining a stable operating point and preserving useful dynamical responses. Existing assembly models often conceptualize learning as a transition from an unstructured network to a fully formed assembly. While this dichotomy is useful, it leaves open a computational question: once an assembly exists, how might it be further tuned without destabilizing the circuit? In our study we expanded on past work [37, 54] and explored how the interaction of I → E homeostatic plasticity and E → E homeostatically compliant plas-ticity not only can stabilize assembly learning, but also allow for flexibility of assembly learning along a contin-uum. A consequence of using I → E plasticity as a home-ostatic mechanism is the continuum of stable network configurations organized by a line attractor in synaptic weight space. While line attractors in weight space have been found in previous rate-based models [37, 54], those studies did not address what functional role such line at-tractors could enact. A key finding in our study is that different points along the line attractor correspond to dis-tinct dynamical response properties despite sharing the same mean operating point. Along the attractor, the net-work changes how it amplifies inputs, filters fluctuations, and responds across timescales. In this sense, the line attractor does not store persistent activity, as in classical working-memory models [114, 115], but instead stores a continuum of synaptic configurations that shape how the circuit processes time-varying inputs. Our analysis challenges a binary view in which stronger assembly structure is assumed to be computationally ad-vantageous. Specifically, we found that strongest assem-bly is not necessarily the most computationally useful: greater recurrence increases gain, but it also amplifies shared fluctuations. This leads to a degradation in the SNR for strongly coupled assemblies. Reliable transmis-sion may therefore be optimized at intermediate assembly 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 strength in our model, rather than maximal recurrence. This continuum of network configurations which shape signal processing also provides an interpretation of learn-ing within our framework. Fluctuations in fast firing-rate dynamics drive slower synaptic changes, producing a gradual drift along the former line attractor toward a stronger assembly structure. In our model, such learning is associated with transient violations of E/I balance, consistent with experimental work suggesting that dis-ruptions of E/I balance can facilitate E synaptic plas-ticity [44, 45, 116]. At the same time, persistent drift can eventually drive the network to instability. Because recurrent networks are never perfectly asynchronous, weak correlations can slowly drive synaptic potentiation even in the absence of structured input [13, 80, 96]. Additional correlations from from shared external excitatory input further ac-celerate this process. Our results, therefore, suggest that mechanisms promoting asynchronous activity and decorrelation may play an important role in stabilizing long-term assembly dynamics. We suggest correlations between E and I populations as a mechanism to miti-gate such drift, as seen experimentally [88, 103]. Pos-sible alternative candidate mechanisms to ensure asyn-chronous network activity include inhibitory feedback, sparse connectivity, and short-term synaptic depression [71, 99, 117, 118]. We interpret our EI network as a single assembly em-bedded within a larger recurrent circuit. An important direction for future work is to extend this framework to the formation and interaction of multiple assemblies. In particular, it would be interesting to investigate how mul-tiple line attractors in weight space could be combined to implement more complex computations, for example, in the setting of a ring attractor [119]. More broadly, the distinct response properties that emerge along the line attractor may provide a useful substrate for coordi-nating assemblies across multi-area networks to support task-relevant computations [120, 121]. Finally, although our framework permits ongoing synaptic plasticity, it assumes fixed baseline firing rates. Previous work has explored the emergence of heteroge-neous firing rates in networks with homeostatic inhibitory synaptic plasticity [38, 122]. Extending our framework to allow heterogeneity in both firing rates and synaptic weights could therefore provide further insight into the computational advantages of flexible assembly organiza-tion 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

B.D. is supported by the NIH grants 1U19NS107613-01, R01NS133598 and, a Vannevar Bush faculty fellow-ship (N000141812002), and the Simons Foundation Col-laboration on the Global Brain. This research benefited from Physics Frontier Center for Living Systems funded by the National Science Foun-dation (PHY-2317138). Financial support was provided via the National Institute from Mathematics and The-ory in Biology (Simons Foundation award MP-TMPS-00005320 and NSF award DMS-2235451). C.M. was funded by a Human Frontier Science Program Postdoc-toral Fellowship LT0005/2024 L (CM). 

IV. METHODS A. Model parameters 

TABLE I. Parameters used across all figures for the Hawkes process network and associated mean-field models (unless oth-erwise specified). 

Sym. Description Value 

NE # excitatory neurons 500 

NI # inhibitory neurons 500 

NX # external (Poisson) afferents 500 

dt Simulation timestep 0.1 ms 

τE = τX Rate/PSC time constant 8 ms 

τI Rate/PSC time constant 16 ms 

τη OU noise time constant 8 ms 

τp STDP eligibility timescale 120 ms 

τwEI I → E plasticity timescale 7.5e5s

τwEE E → E plasticity timescale 2.25 e5s = 3 × τwEI 

w0EE Initial E → E weight ≈ 1.62 e − 3

w0EI Initial I → E weight ≈ 1.61 e − 3

wIE Initial E → I weight ≈ 8.94 e − 4

wII Initial I → I weight ≈ 8.94 e − 4

wIX Initial X → I weight ≈ 1.34 e − 3

wEX Initial X → E weight ≈ 1.79 e − 3

aE Feedforward drive to E 20 Hz 

aI Feedforward drive to I 20 Hz TABLE II. Parameter choices for Figure 5 

wIE Initial E → I weight in Fig 5a. ≈ 1.97 e − 3

wIE Initial E → I weight in Fig 5b. ≈ 8.94 e − 4

wIE Initial E → I weight in Fig 5c. ≈ 1.79 e − 4

Hawkes process network model 

Using a framework developed by Hawkes of interact-ing self-exciting point processes [72, 73], we construct a model of two populations of spiking neuron models with NE excitatory and NI inhibitory neurons, which are connected within and across populations. The in-tensity functions for the E and I populations, i.e. the instantaneous rate in which events occur from a Poisson 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 point process, are modeled as: 

ΛiE (t) = 

> NE

X

> j

wij EE 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jE (u)

−

> NI

X

> j

wij EI 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jI (u)+

> NX

X

> j

wij EX 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jX (u),

ΛiI (t) = 

> NE

X

> j

wij IE 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jE (u)

−

> NI

X

> j

wij II 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jI (u)+

> NX

X

> j

wij IX 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jX (u).

To better streamline our mean-field derivation we allow for autaptic connections (i.e wii αα ̸ = 0) ; in our mean-field derivation this is equivalent to letting Nα − 1 ≈ Nα

(α ∈ { E, I }).The coefficient wij αβ is the coupling strength from neu-ron j in population β to neuron i in population α. dM jα

is the differential spike count process for neuron j in pop-ulation α. The kernel g(t − u) = 1 

> τr

e−(t−u)/τ r H(t − u)

integrates over the past spiking activity. The probability of neuron i in population α producing a spike is approx-imated as Λiαdt (for sufficiently small dt ). In practice, we generate a random number from U (0 , 1) , and if it is smaller than Λiαdt a spike occurs. The external unit i has the intensity function: 

ΛjX (t) = [ aα + √cX ηs(t) + p(1 − cX )ηjp(t)] +.

Here, ηs(t) and ηp(t) are OU processes, which are shared and private between the external units, respectively. The 

ηm processes ( m ∈ { s, p }) evolve according to τη dη m 

> dt

=

−ηm(t) + ση ξ(t), where ξ(t) is Gaussian white noise, τη

is the time constant for the OU process, and ση scales the size of OU noise ( m ∈ { s, p }). The coefficient cX is the correlation coefficient between external units, which defines the proportion of the noise that is shared between units. We choose a regime in which ΛαX ≥ 0 for α ∈{E, I }.

Synaptic plasticity model 

Our plasticity model requires eligibility traces of spik-ing activity: for neuron j in population α ∈ { E, I } the trace xjα(t) obeys: 

τp

dx jα(t)

dt = −xjα(t) + τpSjα(t).

Here, Sjα(t) = P 

> n

δ(t−tjn α ) is the spike train from neuron 

j in population α. The time constant τp sets the tem-poral selectivity of the spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) process. Solving the above differential equation (with xjα(0) = 0 and tjn α > 0 for all n) yields xjα(t) = P 

> n

H(t −

tjn α )e−(t−tαjn )/τ p . The synaptic weight wij αβ between a presynaptic neuron k in population β and a postsynaptic neuron j in population α evolves according to a spike-timing dependent plasticity rule: 

τwα 

dw ij Eα 

dt =

 12

 xiE Sjα + xjαSiE

 − bEα τpSjα



.

The dynamics of wij Eα is driven, in part, by combinations of eligibility x(t) and spiking activity S(t). The coef-ficient 1/2 reflects the positive symmetric nature of the STDP window (e.g. each half of the STDP window is net LTP). The timescale of weight dynamics is set by τwα .

Linear-response propagator 

To compute response properties of networks at differ-ent locations along the line attractor, we used the lin-ear response theory of the reduced mean-field rate model (since the Hawkes process model is a linear system then this analysis is not a perturbative one). For these cal-culations, synaptic weights were held fixed because the rate dynamics evolve on a much faster timescale than the synaptic plasticity dynamics. For a fixed pair of synaptic weights (wEE , w EI ), the mean-field rate dynamics can be written in convolution form as: ⃗r (t) = W[⃗g ∗⃗r ]( t) + WX [⃗g ∗⃗r X ]( t),

where ⃗r (t) = [ rE (t), r I (t)] T ,⃗r X (t) = [ aE , a I ]T , and ⃗g (t)

denotes the population-dependent synaptic filters. In Fourier space, we define the frequency-dependent propagator 

∆( f ) = ( I − W⃗g (f )) −1 .

The propagator describes how activity is filtered and re-currently amplified by the network. The equilibrium fir-ing rates are obtained from the zero frequency compo-nent, ⃗r ∗ = ∆(0) ⃗g (0) WX⃗r X .

For weights on the line attractor, the excitatory fixed point satisfies r∗ 

> E

= b.The same propagator determines the stability of the rate dynamics. Rate dynamics are stable when the re-current gain remains bounded for all relevant frequencies. Equivalently, instability occurs when 

det ( I − W⃗g (f )) = 0 ,

or when the spectral radius of ⃗g (f )W reaches one. Thus, all response and covariance calculations below were re-stricted to weight values for which the fixed point ⃗r ∗ is stable. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Perturbation protocol 

For each location on the line attractor (wEE , w EI ) we compute the corresponding steady-state firing rates ⃗r ∗.We then injected a brief perturbation into the E popula-tion and measured the activity deviation from baseline, 

δ⃗ r (t) = ⃗r (t) −⃗r ∗.

The perturbation was represented as: 

δ⃗ u(t) = Aδ (t)⃗v E ,⃗ v E =

10



,

where A sets the perturbation amplitude and ⃗v E indi-cates that the input is delivered to the excitatory popu-lation. The Fourier-domain response is: 

δ⃗ r (f ) = ∆( f )W⃗g (f )δ⃗ u(f ).

In the time domain, this can be written in terms of the propagator: 

δ⃗ r (t) = (∆( t) − δ(t)I) ∗ δ⃗ u(t),

where ∆( t) = δ(t)I + H(t)diag (τr )−1WeJt . This is the form we use for the theory. In simulations of the Hawkes process network, the cor-responding perturbation was implemented by briefly forc-ing the stimulated E neurons to spike. The population response was then measured from the baseline-subtracted population-averaged E firing rate, 

δ¯rE (t) = ¯ rE (t) − ¯r ∗ 

> E

.

Dynamical response metrics 

For each (wEE , w EI ) point on the line attractor, all response quantities were computed with synaptic weights held fixed. The perturbation response was obtained from the linear-response expression 

δ⃗ r (t) = (∆( t) − δ(t)I) ∗ δ⃗ u(t),

= H(t)eJt diag ( τr )−1 W ∗ δ⃗ u(t)= Ae Jt diag (⃗τ r )−1WH(t)

with δ⃗ u(t) = Aδ (t)⃗v E . The excitatory component δr E (t)

was used to compute the time-integrated squared re-sponse 

EE = A2

Z ∞

> 0+

|∆EE (t) − δ(t)|2 dt, 

= A2

Z ∞

> 0+

[eJt diag (⃗τ r )−1W]EE  

> 2

dt 

= A2

Z ∞

> 0+

 eJt 

> EE

N w EE 

τE

+  eJt 

> EI

N w IE 

τI

> 2

dt 

The lower integration limit excludes the instantaneous delta-function component of the propagator and includes only the causal response following the perturbation. We remark that in the time domain the propagator becomes: 

∆( t) = δ(t)I + H(t) diag ( ⃗τ r )−1 WeJt , necessitating the 

−δ(t)I term in the first line. The relaxation time of the perturbation was computed from the eigenvalues of the linear response operator at zero frequency. Specifically, if χk(0) are the eigenvalues of − diag( ⃗τ r )−1∆(0) −1, then 

τdecay = − 1max k Re [ χk(0)] .

This quantity was evaluated for each (wEE , w EI ) pair on the line attractor. The balance index was computed directly from the zero-frequency propagator as 

β = 1 − wEI ∆EI (0) 1 + wEE ∆EE (0) .

Here ∆EE (0) and ∆EI (0) denote the corresponding en-tries of the propagator evaluated at f = 0 .

Response variability 

The covariance and trial-to-trial variability were com-puted from the mean-field cross spectrum of the popula-tion intensity. For the covariance and variance calcula-tions, the spectrum was evaluated as: 

CΛΛ (f ) = ∆( f )



W diag( ⃗g (f )) D0

N − 1 diag( ⃗g (−f )) WT

+ WX diag( ⃗g (f )) CX (f ) diag( ⃗g (−f )) WTX



∆( −f )T ,

The mean-field autocovariance of the excitatory popula-tion was obtained by taking the inverse fourier transform of the EE component of CΛΛ (f ),

[CΛΛ (τ )] EE =

Z ∞−∞ 

[CΛΛ (f )] EE e2πif τ df. 

The corresponding trial-to-trial population-rate vari-ance was computed from the zero-lag value ( τ = 0 ) of this covariance, 

Var[ rE ] = [ CΛΛ (0)] EE =

Z ∞−∞ 

[CΛΛ (f )] EE df. 

Finally, the signal-to-noise ratio was computed as 

SN R = δr 0

> E

pVar[ rE ] ,

where δr 0 

> E

= AN w EE /τ E is the initial excitatory re-sponse amplitude measured from the same theoretical perturbation response δr E (t).

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES a

b

ecd

> 

FIG. S1. Synaptic Weight Dynamics for Different Learning Rules a. Mean synaptic ¯wEE and ¯wEI evolution over time for the Asymmetric E → E STDP rule (far left; the colors denote different E neuron firing rates) with homeostatic I → E

STDP. In ( ¯wEE , ¯wEI ) space, they lie on the same line, but ¯wEE never evolves such that dw EE  

> dt

= 0 . b. Mean synaptic ¯wEE 

(left) and ¯wEI evolution over time for the Asymmetric E → E STDP rule but LTD is larger than LTP. The corresponding 

E plasticity rule is dw EE  

> dt

∝ − r2 

> E

results in persistent depression for ¯wEE and ¯wEI . c. Mean synaptic ¯wEE (left) and ¯wEI 

evolution over time for the Asymmetric E → E STDP rule which includes triplets of spikes. In ¯wEI vs ¯wEE space, they lie on the same line as that found in the pairwise rules used in the text. The corresponding E plasticity rule is dw EE  

> dt

= r2 

> E

(rE − b)

d. The plasticity rule in which bEE = 30 and bEI = 20 results in net depression for the E → E connections, which further drives depression for the I → E connections. The mean field plasticity rule dw EE  

> dt

= rE (rE − bEE ) e. The E → E STDP rule is similarly downshifted initially, but bE and bI are both allowed to be dynamic according to a low pass filtered equation of the firing rate τb db Eα  

> dt

= ( rE − bEα )

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21 (a) (e) (d) (c) (b) (f ) (h) (g) 

FIG. S2. Response properties of the Hawkes process network when the external synapses are perturbed. a. 

Networks with low (purple dot) and high (orange dot) on the line attractor are selected. b. We similarly parametrize location on the line attractor varying from 0 to 1 starting with where the line attractor crosses wEE = 0 to the coordinate {r∗ 

> E

= 0 , r ∗ 

> I

= 0 }.The peak amplitude of the response along the line attractor is flat until it grows nonlinearly near the top of the line attractor. Grey denotes the standard deviation of 20 seeds. c. Similar to Figure 6, the energy EE grows along the line attractor for theory (black solid) and simulations (black dashed) along the line attractor. d. The relaxation time to a perturbation, τdecay ,grows along the line attractor for theory (black solid) and simulations (black dashed) along the line attractor. e. On the line attractor, both networks still fire at the target firing rate b. The network with weaker coupling has a short, rapid response (top). Dark purple is theory, light purple are simulations. Upon receiving a perturbation, the network with stronger recurrent coupling has a longer rebound in response (top). Dark orange is theory. Light orange are simulations. f. The trial-to-trial variability , Var [rE ], grows nonlinearly along the line attractor for theory (black solid) and simulations (black dashed) along the line attractor. g. The signal to noise ratio now decreases monotonically. The signal of the perturbation in the linear theory are no longer proportional to the connectivity, therefore stronger connectivity leads to noise dominating more. h. The balance index decreases monotonically for both theory and simulations on the line attractor. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

APPENDICES A. Derivation of the mean-field rate equations 

Before considering the case of the network with plastic weights, we can first consider the mean-field dynamics of this network with fixed weights. Let us consider a typical neuron i in population α ∈ { E, I }, whose trial averaged activity, riα(t) = ⟨Λiα(t)⟩, obeys: 

riα(t) = 

 NEX

> j

wij αE 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jE (u)



−

 NIX

> j

wij αI 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jI (u)



+

 NXX

> j

wij αX 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jX (u)



=

> NE

X

> j

wij αE 

Z t

> −∞



g(t − u)Λ jE (u)du 



,

−

> NI

X

> j

wij αI 

Z t

> −∞



g(t − u)Λ jI (u)du 



+

> NX

X

> j

wij αX 

Z t

> −∞



g(t − u)Λ jX (u)du 



.

We obtain an evolution equation for riα(t) rates by dif-ferentiating to yield: 

ddt riα(t) = ddt 

> NE

X

> j

wij αE 

Z t

> −∞



g(t − u)Λ jE (u)du 



− ddt 

> NI

X

> j

wij αI 

Z t

> −∞



g(t − u)Λ jI (u)du 



+ ddt 

> NX

X

> j

wij αX 

Z t

> −∞



g(t − u)Λ jX (u)du 



.

It is noteworthy to acknowledge that the counting pro-cess is not actually differentiable, however, we can take a trial average and observe that Λ( t) = ⟨ dM dt ⟩. Also consider that g(t − u) = τr −1e −(t−u) 

> τr

H(t − u) such that  

> ∂g ∂t

(t − u) = −τr −1g(t − u). Likewise, we need to consider that we are differentiating a convolution with a variable in the bounds. This will require Leibniz’s rule: 

ddt 

Z t

> −∞



g(t − u)Λ jβ (u)d u



= g (0) rjβ (t)+ R t 

> −∞
> ∂∂t

g(t − u)rjβ (u)d u. 

Starting from the last equality and writing riβ (t) = 



Λiβ (t)



(for β ∈ { E, I, X }), the Leibniz step with the normalized exponential kernel gives, term-by-term, 

ddt riα(t) = − 1

τr

riα(t)+ (9) 

1

τr



> NE

X

> j=1

wij αE rjE (t) −

> NI

X

> j=1

wij αI rjI (t) + 

> NX

X

> j=1

wij αX rjX (t)

 .

Averaging over population α yields: 

ddt 

1

NαNαX

> i=1

riα(t)

!

= − 1

τr

1

NαNαX

> i=1

riα(t)

!

+ 1

τr

[TαE − T αI + TαX ] ,

where the three sums have the form: 

Tαβ = 1

NαNαX

> i=1
> Nβ

X

> j=1

wij αβ rjβ (t)=

> Nβ

X

> j=1

rjβ (t) 1

NαNαX

> i=1

wij αβ 

= wαβ Nβ

X

> j=1

rjβ (t)= Nβ wαβ rβ

for β ∈ { E, I, X }. Here we have assumed that the sum 

Nα−1 P 

> i

wij αβ = wαβ is independent of pre- and postsy-naptic neurons, and we define the population averaged firing rate rβ (t) = N −1

> β

P 

> j

rjβ (t).Inserting the above into Eq. (9) we have: ⃗τ ddt rα(t) = −rα(t)+ NE wαE rE −NI wαI rI +NX wαX rαX 

For the full E and I network we have that in vector form the evolution: ⃗τ d⃗ rdt = −⃗r + W⃗r + W X⃗r X .

Here we have defined the matrices: 

W =

NE wEE −NI wEI 

NE wIE −NI wII 



,

WX = NX

wEX 00 wIX 



.

Solving for ⃗r yields: ⃗r ∗ = (1 − W)−1WX⃗r X .

B. Mean-field theory for synaptic dynamics 

This equation has a mean-field equivalent of the form: 

τwα 

dw Eα 

dt = τp(rαrE − bEα rα) + 

Z ∞−∞ 

eK(f ) ⟨Sα, S E ⟩ (f )df 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 We have used ⟨Sα, S E ⟩(f ) = ⟨SE , S α⟩(f ). Further, take note that eK(f ) is the Fourier transform of the STDP kernel, which in this case is eK(w) = F[e−t/τ p H(t)] =  

> τp
> 1+2 πif τ p

. This Kernel is convolved with the spike train cross spectrum ⟨Sα, S E ⟩(f ). For a network in the asyn-chronous state we have that ⟨Sα, S E ⟩(f ) ∼ O (1 /N ). See [80] for the derivation. 

C. E − I network dynamics 

1. Stability of the Firing Rates 

The dynamics of the fast E − I network is given by: ⃗τ r

d⃗ rdt = −⃗r + N  W⃗ r + W X⃗r X



= J⃗ r + diag( ⃗τ r )−1N W X⃗r X ,

where the recurrent coupling is given by the stability ma-trix: 

J =

> −1+ N w EE
> τE
> −N w EI
> τE
> N w IE
> τI
> −1−N w II
> τI

!

.

To find the eigenvalues λ of the rate dynamics, we solve 

det( J − λI) = 0 . The eigenvalues λ± satisfy the usual quadratic formula, 

λ± = 12

h

Tr (J) ±

q Tr [J]2 − 4Det [J]

i

λ± = 12

 −1 + N w EE 

τE

+ −1 − N w II 

τI

±

s −1 + N w EE 

τE

+ 1 + N w II 

τI

2

− 4N 2wEI wIE 

τE τI



.

Case 1: Complex Case. 

The eigenvalues are complex when we have Tr (J)2 − 4Det < 0.

In this case, for the real component of the eigenvalues to be negative (to yield a stable solution), we then require Tr (J) = −1 + N w EE 

τE

+ −1 − N w II 

τI

< 0

Rearranging gives the following condition: 

wEE < τE + τI + N τ E wII 

N τ I

.

When the cross population weights are strong, then this is effectively an "oscillation" dominated regime in which the cross talk between populations is strong relativew to the recurrent talk within populations. This produces an upper bound on the recurrent excitatory weights relative to the recurrent inhibitory weights. That is, when the cross talk is large, the recurrent inhibitory weights also needs to be large in order for the firing rates to remain stable. 

Case 2: Real Case. 

Recurrent weights large relative to cross weights −→ all real. In other words, this is the case in which the re-current weights are strong relative to the cross-weights between the populations. In this case, the radical term is positive and the eigenvalues are purely real. 

− (1 + N w II ) (1 − N w EE ) < N 2wIE wEI 

This condition creates an upper bound on the recur-rent weights together. 

Boundary Between Cases. 

It is clear that given these cases, there is also a bound-ary in phase space in which the imaginary (oscillatory) regime transitions to the real (non-oscillatory) regime with strong recurrent weights. This will occur when the radical term is zero in the solution for the eigenvalues above. If the term in the radical is negative, then we are in the imaginary oscillatory (strong cross EI weights) regime. 

Recurrent Regime: 

wEI wIE <

τI (N w EE − 1) + τE (N w II + 1) 2

4N 2τE τI

Oscillatory Regime : 

wEI wIE >

τI (N w EE − 1) + τE (N w II + 1) 2

4N 2τE τI

The boundary of the oscillatory regime defines a parabola in wEI vs wEE place, above which (large wEI or wIE )the model is in the oscillatory regime and below which it is in the recurrent regime (small wEI or wIE ). It is also worth calculating the boundaries in which the rates become negative. If r∗ 

> E

= 0 , we see a boundary 

wEI = aE wEX (1+ N w II )   

> aI(N w IX )

arises and if r∗ 

> I

= 0 , then the boundary is wEE = (aE N w EX wIE +aI wIX )  

> aIN w IX

.

2. Fixed points of the Slow System: The Weights 

We conduct a similar analysis as before, but now on the slow system in which we find the fixed points of the weights. In the asynchronous mean-field limit the cor-relation integral is O(1 /N ) so we neglect it, such that 

˙wEα ∝ rα (rE − b). To study the steady state of the slow system, we similarly set dw EE  

> dt

= 0 and dw EI  

> dt

= 0 ,which occurs if rE = b and rE > 0. We assume that by the time the weights reach a steady state the rates are at their steady states such that r∗ 

> E

= b. This is known 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 as a fast slow decomposition. This will produce the line attractor 

τwI 

dw EI 

dt = τprI

 rE − b = 0 ,τwE 

dw EE 

dt = τprE

 rE − b = 0 ,r∗ 

> E

− b = 0 ,b = N w EX aE

 1 + N w II 

 − N w IX aI

 N w EI 

 1 − N w EE 

  1 + N w II 

 +  N w IE 

  N w EI 

 ,

(N w EI )∗ =

 1 + N w II 

h

N w EX aE − b 1 − N w EE 

i

b(N w IE ) + N w IX aI

.w∗ 

> EI

=

 1 + N w II 

h

N w EX aE − b 1 − N w EE 

i

N (b(N w IE ) + N w IX aI ) .

Recall we did all of this analysis because we assume a fast slow decomposition in which the fast system reaches a steady state extremely fast relative to the slow system: 

0 < ε = τr /τ wEα ≪ 1.

We can define a critical manifold C, which is the set of all points where the fast subsystem is already in equilib-rium for the current weight values. This manifold exists in the absence of the weights changing. We can consider the case of the weights evolving; as long as ε = τr /τ w ≪ 1, Fenichel’s theorem ensures the persistence of a locally invariant perturbed mani-fold Cε that lies an O(ε) distance from the critical man-ifold C. The dynamics approach the line attractor in the (wEE , w EI ) plane (the projection of Cε onto weight space). Fenichel’s theorem relies on normal hyperbolicity of the fast subsystem equilibria (fast-direction eigenval-ues have non-zero real parts )[123, 124]. In the model, ˙wEE = 0 forces rE = b, the dynamics ap-proach the line attractor in the (wEE , w EI ) plane, which can be considered a subset of C.

D. Stability of Fixed Points for the Line Attractor 

Our aim is to investigate stability in a recurrent sys-tem with excitatory and inhibitory plasticity. While this nonlinear EI plasticity rule has been shown to stabilize runaway excitatory weight dynamics, this has only been examined in feedforward models [37]. In order to study the role of EE and EI plasticity on network stability in the recurrent network, we use timescale separation be-tween the rate and weight dynamics. We assume the firing rate dynamics occur more rapidly than the weight dynamics ( τwE , τ wI ≫ τE , τ I ), allowing us to analyze fir-ing rate stability and weight stability separately. This re-duces the four-dimensional problem to a two-dimensional problem. We will thus assume that the firing rates reach their fixed points before the plasticity dynamics become relevant. 

J =

 ∂h ∂w EE 

> ∂h ∂w EI
> ∂z ∂w EE
> ∂z ∂w EI

   

> r∗
> E,r ∗
> I,w ∗
> EE ,w ∗
> EI

.

Using the fixed-point relation r∗ 

> E

= b, we get 

∂wEE h = ( r∗ 

> E

− b)∂wEE r∗ 

> E

+ r∗ 

> E

∂wEE r∗

> E

= ( r∗ 

> E

− b + r∗ 

> E

)∂wEE r∗

> E

= b∂ wEE r∗ 

> E

.

Likewise, the other terms of the Jacobian reduce to 

∂wEI h = b∂ wEI r∗ 

> E

,∂wEE z = r∗ 

> I

∂wEE r∗ 

> E

,∂wEI z = r∗ 

> I

∂wEI r∗ 

> E

.

Thus, 

J =

 

> bτwE

∂wEE r∗  

> EbτwE

∂wEI r∗ 

> Er∗
> I
> τwI

∂wEE r∗ 

> Er∗
> I
> τwI

∂wEI r∗

> E

 

> w∗
> EE ,w ∗
> EI

.

To test the stability of the line attractor, we leave 

wEE as a free parameter and substitute the correspond-ing value of w∗ 

> EI

, since the line attractor is a function of 

wEE . This gives 

∂h ∂w EE 

= 1

τwE 

b2N (wIX aI + bw IE )

D ,∂h ∂w EI 

= − 1

τwE 

bN 2(bw IE + aI wIX )2

(1 + N w II )D ,∂z ∂w EE 

= 1

τwI 

bN 2(bw IE + aI wIX )2

(1 + N w II )D ,∂z ∂w EI 

= − 1

τwI 

N 3(wIX aI + bw IE )3

(1 + N w II )2D .

Here D = wIX aI (1 − N w EE ) + N w EX aE wIE . To determine stability, we need to find the eigenvalues of the Jacobian. For a two-dimensional system, 

J = Df (x∗) = 

 a bc d



,

Tr[ J] = a + d, Det[ J] = ad − bc, λ1,2 = Tr[ J] ± pTr[ J]2 − 4Det[ J]2 .

A direct inspection shows that the determinant of the Jacobian above is zero. Therefore, one eigenvalue is zero, corresponding to motion along the line attractor. Stabil-ity transverse to the line requires the nonzero eigenvalue to be negative. Since the nonzero eigenvalue is the trace, the stability condition is 

Tr[ J] < 0.

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 The trace is 

Tr[ J] = wIX aI + bw IE 

D

×

 b2NτwE 

− N 3(wIX aI + bw IE )2

τwI (1 + N w II )2



< 0.

Since wIX aI + bw IE > 0, the sign of the trace is deter-mined by D and the bracketed term. Ensuring the firing rates are stable and positive means D is positive. There-fore, we consider the bracketed term’s sign to determine the condition. Taking the bracketed term gives 

b2NτwE 

− N 3(wIX aI + bw IE )2

τwI (1 + N w II )2 < 0.

Multiplying through by the positive factors and sim-plifying gives 

−τwE (N w IE )2 + τwI (1 + N w II )2 b2

− [2 τwE N w IX aI (N w IE )] b − τwE (N w IX aI )2 < 0,Ab 2 + Bb + C < 0,

where 

A = −τwE (N w IE )2 + τwI (1 + N w II )2,B = −2τwE N w IX aI (N w IE ),C = −τwE (N w IX aI )2.

The discriminant is 

Ξ = B2 − 4AC = 4 a2 

> I

N 2τwE τwI (1 + N w II )2w2 

> IX

.

Because all parameters are positive, Ξ > 0. Thus, the quadratic always has two real roots. The remaining dis-tinction is whether the parabola opens upward or down-ward, which is determined by the sign of A.For A > 0,

A > 0, τwI (1 + N w II )2 > τ wE (N w IE )2,

1 + N w II >

r τwE 

τwI 

N w IE ,

lim   

> N→∞

wII >

r τwE 

τwI 

wIE .

For A < 0,

A < 0, 1 + N w II <

r τwE 

τwI 

N w IE ,

lim   

> N→∞

wII <

r τwE 

τwI 

wIE .

We now consider the two roots b1 and b2. The first root is 

b1 = N w IX aI

 −τwE (N w IE ) + √τwE τwI (1 + N w II )

τwE (N w IE )2 − τwI (1 + N w II )2



= −N w IX aI

q τwE 

> τwI

(1 + N w II ) + 

q τwE  

> τwI

N w IE 

< 0.

The second root is 

b2 = N w IX aI

 −τwE (N w IE ) − √τwE τwI (1 + N w II )

τwE (N w IE )2 − τwI (1 + N w II )2



= N w IX aI

q τwE 

> τwI

(1 + N w II ) −

q τwE  

> τwI

N w IE 

.

When A > 0, the denominator of b2 is positive and b1 is clearly negative. The part of the parabola that lies below the x axis thus falls between these two roots. Therefore, the viable b for the A > 0 case is, 

b1 < 0 < b 2,

and the admissible interval is 

b1 < b < b 2.

Thus, b is bounded above by b2.When A < 0, the denominator of b2 is negative, so both roots are negative. In this case, the ordering is 

b2 < b 1 < 0.

Likewise, the part of the parabola falling below the x axis will be to the left and right of these roots. : 

b ∈ (−∞ , b 2) ∪ (b1, ∞).

Since b1 < 0, any positive value of b lies in the interval 

(b1, ∞). Thus, in the A < 0 case, the quadratic condition does not impose an additional upper bound on positive 

b.

E. Separatrix of the slow–weight dynamics 

The slow weight dynamics are two-dimensional, so ev-ery trajectory lies in the (wEE , w EI ) plane. In this plane, the line attractor is given by the set of weights satisfying 

r∗ 

> E

= b. The region in which this attractor is rate-stable is bounded above by the r∗ 

> E

= 0 line and below by wEI = 0 

together with the rate-stability boundaries derived previ-ously. Nevertheless, even for initial conditions within this nominally stable region, certain parameter choices yield trajectories that leave the physically relevant weight do-main and do not converge to the line attractor. This motivates identifying additional invariant boundaries of the slow flow. In particular, we seek a separatrix : an invariant curve that partitions weight space into regions with qualita-tively different long-term outcomes (e.g., trajectories that approach the line attractor versus those that do not). Because the slow dynamics are deterministic and au-tonomous, trajectories cannot cross a separatrix; ini-tial conditions on opposite sides evolve toward different asymptotic behaviors. The separatrix of interest is the phase curve passing through a distinguished point in weight space where the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 steady-state rates satisfy r∗ 

> E

= r∗ 

> I

= 0 . At this point, the closed-form fixed-point expressions rE (wEE , w EI ) and 

rI (wEE , w EI ) become singular (taking an indeterminate 

0/0 form), so the reduced fast-slow description must be interpreted in a limiting sense. This point is there-fore nonhyperbolic in the reduced slow flow and serves as the natural reference point for selecting the separatrix. 

1. Setup (fast–slow reduction and slow flow in weight space) 

With rate dynamics fast relative to synaptic weights, the steady state rates are fixed points of the synaptic weights (rE (wEE , w EI ), r I (wEE , w EI )) :

r∗ 

> E

(wEE , w EI )= N   − aE (wEX + N w EX wII ) + aI N w EI wIX 



−1 + N (wEE − wII ) + N 2(−wEI wIE + wEE wII ) ,r∗ 

> I

(wEE , w EI )= N  aE N w EX wIE + aI (1 − N w EE )wIX 



1 + N (−wEE + wII ) + N 2(wEI wIE − wEE wII ) .

2. Eliminate time and separate variables 

. We can obtain the trajectories by dividing out our differential equations. We will luckily be able to inte-grate these out to get actual trajectory curves in the 

(wEE , w EI )-plane. Dividing the slow equations (which removes the common factor r∗ 

> E

− b) gives 

dw EI 

dw EE 

= ˙wEI 

˙wEE 

= τwE 

τwI 

r∗

> I

r∗

> E

= τwE 

τwI 

aE N w EX wIE + aI (1 − N w EE )wIX 

aE wEX (1 + N w II ) − aI N w IX wEI 

.

Separate variables and integrate: 



aE wEX (1 + N w II ) − aI N w IX wEI 



dw EI 

= τwE 

τwI 



aE N w EX wIE + aI (1 − N w EE )wIX 



dw EE .

The integral that results is very simple: 

aE wEX (1 + N w II )wEI − aI N w IX 

2 w2 

> EI

+ C

= τwE 

τwI 



aE N w EX wIE + aI wIX 



wEE − aI N w IX 

2 w2

> EE



.

3. How will this characterize the separatrices? 

A separatrix is an invariant curve that forms the boundary between different trajectory behaviors. Thus the separatrix is the trajectory that passes through the reference (nonhyperbolic) fixed point. Thus, upon inte-grating, we will get the specific separatrices by using the coordinates of the nonhyperbolic fixed point to get the constant of integration. This point corresponds to r∗ 

> E

= 0 

and r∗ 

> I

= 0 , which in weight space has the following co-ordinates: 

wEI 0 = aE wEX (1 + N w II )

aI N w IX 

,wEE 0 = aE N w EX wIE + aI wIX 

aI N w IX 

Evaluating the output of the integral at (wEE 0, w EI 0)

gives the constant that selects the separatrix: 

Csep = 12aI N w IX 

[a2 

> E

w2 

> EX

(1 + N w II )2

− τwE 

τwI 

 aE N w EX wIE + aI wIX 

2].

4. Explicit separatrix wEI (wEE ) (two branches) 

Substitute Csep back in and solve the resulting quadratic in wEI . The separatrix (the phase curve through the fixed point) satisfies 

wEI (wEE ) = aE wEX (1 + N w II ) ± p Ξ( wEE )

aI N w IX 

where the (nonnegative) discriminant simplifies to: 

Ξ = τwE 

τwI 

(aI N w IX wEE − (aE N w EX wIE + aI wIX )) 2

√Ξ = aI N w IX 

r τwE 

τwI 

|wEE − wEE 0|

Plugging in for Ξ and then simplifying common terms further, this becomes very clean: 

wsep  

> EI

(wEE ) = aE wEX (1 + N w II )

aI N w IX 

±

q τwE  

> τwI

aE N w EX wIE + aI (1 − N w EE ) wIX 

aI N w IX 

wEI (wEE ) = wEI 0 ±

r τwE 

τwI 

(wEE − wEE 0)

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

F. Mean-field for the Triplet STDP Rule 

The E → E plasticity rule considered in the main text (Eq. 1) is linear in the post synaptic firing activity. If we consider the case in which the rule is quadratic in the post-synaptic neuron activity , which is the mean-field analog of the triplet STDP rule [84, 85], we see the same constraint on the plasticity threshold arises. 

∂w EE 

∂t = h = 1

τwE 

τprE rE (rE − b)

∂w EI 

∂t = z = 1

τwI 

τprI rE (rE − b)

Keep in mind here, we use the fixed points of the fir-ing rates from the fast system. The line attractor here (wEI ∗) also remains unchanged due to the homeostatic rule. This will produce the same fixed point condition 

r∗ 

> E

= b, so we will see the same stability from Appendix D condition arise: 

J =

 ∂h ∂w EE 

> ∂h ∂w EI
> ∂z ∂w EE
> ∂z ∂w EI

   

> rE∗,r I∗,w ∗
> EE ,w ∗
> EI

Tr[ J] = ∂h ∂w EE 

+ ∂z ∂w EI 

< 0,

= b2

τwE 

− (N w IX aI + bN w IE )2

τwI (1 + N w II )2 < 0.

We see this is exactly the same result as what we have in the linear case. Thus the conditions for the linear and nonlinear plasticity rules are the same. 

G. Perturbations on the Line Attractor (Analytics) 

This section helps build the mathematical relationship between the propagator ∆( f ) and various response and stability properties of the network. As discussed, the propagator provides information about how the network responds to perturbations. Beginning with the integral equation of our mean-field model: ⃗r (t) = W[⃗g ∗⃗r ]( t) + WX [⃗g ∗⃗r X ]( t),

Observe that this is the equivalent to the mean-field rate Eq. (2) if ⃗g (t−u) = 1⃗τ r e−| t−u|/⃗ τ r H(t−u). To perturb the system, we inject spikes directly into the E population. ⃗r (t) = W[⃗g ∗ (⃗r +⃗u)]( t),

this drives fluctuations around the fixed point ,δ⃗ r (t) = W[⃗g ∗ (δ⃗ r + δ⃗ u)]( t),

take into Fourier space 

δ⃗ r (f ) = W[⃗g (f )δ⃗ r (f ) + ⃗g (f )δ⃗ u(f )] ,

solve for δ⃗ r (f ),δ⃗ r (f ) = [ I − W⃗g (f )] −1W⃗g (f )δ⃗ u(f ),δ⃗ r (f ) = ∆( f )W⃗g (f )δ⃗ u(f ).

This analysis will allow us to relate the response to perturbations to the response via the propagator. 

1. Stability Boundaries from Propagator 

Clearly the propagator plays a key role in determining how a response perturbation evolves due to a network perturbation. In Fourier space, this takes the form: 

∆( f ) = [ I − W⃗g (f )] −1

Given its relationship to the perturbation response, we can consider that the propagator can tell us where the boundaries of stability lie. These boundaries are deter-mined when the denominator becomes singular. In par-ticular, if det[ I − W⃗g (f )] = 0 ,, then the propagator has a pole (is undefined), meaning there exists a mode whose gain diverges. Equivalently, this happens when one eigen-value of W⃗g (f ) equals 1 such that, ρ(W⃗g (f )) = 1 ,, i.e. the spectral radius reaches unity. Consider the denomi-nator term: 

I − W⃗g (f ) = 

 1 − wEE N g E (f ) wEI N g I (f )

−wIE N g E (f ) 1 + wII N g I (f )



.

Here gI (f ) and gE (f ) correspond to the kernels with time constants τI and τE respectively. The determinant gives: 

0 = (1 − N w EE gE ) (1 + N w II gI ) + N 2wEI wIE gE gI .

Substitute gE (f ) and gI (f ) :

0 = 



1 − N w EE 

1 + i2πf τ E

  

1 + N w II 

1 + i2πf τ I



+

N 2wEI wIE 

(1 + i2πf τ E ) (1 + i2πf τ I ) .

Multiply both sides by (1 + i2πf τ E ) (1 + i2πf τ I ) :

0 = (1 + i2πf τ E − N w EE ) (1 + 2 πif τ I + N w II ) + N 2wEI wIE 

0 = (1 − N w EE ) (1 + N w II ) + N 2wEI wIE 

+ 2 πif (τI (1 − N w EE ) + τE (1 + N w II )) + (2 πif )2τE τI

0 = (2 πif )2τE τI + Bf + C

We can see this gives us a 2nd order polynomial in f. This allows us to invoke the Routh–Hurwitz criterion for stable systems. In particular, if we have our propagator which uses the first order kernel (e.g. f (z) = 1 /(1 + τ z )

), then we can obtain the above quadratic characteristic polynomial 

P (z) = Af 2 + Bz + C, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 whose roots lie in the left half-plane if the system is stable for a secondo rder system, stability is equivalent to 

A > 0, B > 0, C > 0

Considering C > 0 and B > 0 will correspond to con-ditions of stability for the non-oscillatory and the oscil-latory mode respectively: 

Non-oscillatory regime. 

If f=0, then the real part must vanish on the boundary 

0 < (1 − N w EE ) (1 + N w II ) + N 2wEI wIE .

Oscillatory regime. 

We also consider when f̸ =. In this case, both the real terms and the imaginary terms must vanish on the boundary. 

0 < C + (2 πif )2τE τI

0 < 2πif (τI (1 − N w EE ) + τE (1 + N w II )) 0 < 1 − N w EE 

τE

+ N w II + 1 

τI

We also see B would need to be 0, but this would actually give the same equation! Thus, this gives us equations for the boundaries! We can consider this will be stable for weak coupling w = 0 

up to some strong coupling w >> 0, particularly for wEE ,in whcih can we can see that the equation in the DC case and the oscillatory case will be greater than 0. This can help us pinpoint an inequality in which we obtains table dynamics, which will be det [I −⃗g (f )W] > 0 So we can simply say the two equalities are both positive inequalities, such that: 

0 < (1 − N w EE ) (1 + N w II ) + N 2wEI wIE 

0 < 1 − N w EE 

τE

+ N w II + 1 

τI

These are the same conditions of stability we would find were we to use the eigenvalues of the Jacobian. 

2. Dynamical Response to Perturbations 

Let us begin with our expression of the perturbation in terms of the propagator Write the (time-domain) evo-lution equation for δ⃗ r (t) :⃗τ r

ddt δ⃗ r(t) = −Iδ⃗ r(t) + W(δ⃗ r(t) + δ⃗ u(t)) 

ddt δ⃗ r(t) = Jδ⃗ r(t) + diag (τ r )−1Wδ⃗ u(t),

where J is the Jacobian. Now consider rewriting this in terms of a function Φ( t) , which is in terms of the propagator. It will give us the full evolution of the per-turbation 

δ⃗ r (t) = Φ( t) ∗ δ⃗ u( t), Φ( f ) = ∆( f )W⃗g (f ).

Φ( f ) = ∆ − I

Plug this into the the ODE: 

ddt (Φ ∗ δ⃗ u)( t) = J(Φ ∗ δ⃗ u)( t)+ 

diag (τr )−1Wδ⃗ u(t),

( ˙Φ ∗ δ⃗ u)( t) + Φ  0+ δ⃗ u(t) = J(Φ ∗ δ⃗ u)( t)+ 

diag (τr )−1Wδ⃗ u(t),

( ˙Φ − JΦ) ∗ δ⃗ u =    diag (τr )−1W − Φ  0+  δ(t) ∗ δ⃗ u. 

For this to hold for arbitrary δ⃗ u, we must have: 

Φ (0 +) = diag (τr )−1W. This gives us a simple ODE for 

t > 0, for which we know the solution: 

˙Φ( t) − JΦ( t) = 0 .

The solution to this equation can be written as the following Green’s function: 

Φ( t) = H(t)eJt diag ( τr )−1 W t > 0∆( t) = δ(t)I + H(t)eJt diag ( τr )−1 W.

This will give us the evolution of the rates in response to a perturbation δ⃗ u:

δ⃗ r (t) = (∆( t) − δ(t)I) ∗ δ⃗ u(t)

3. Energy 

We are interested in obtaining an expression of the energy in terms of the propagator (and network pa-rameters). Consider an energy like term from the in-tegrated perturbation, which can be written as follows: 

EE = R ∞ 

> 0

δr E (t)2dt .We just need to solve for the perturbation, square it, and integrate it. The procedure is straightforward, be-ginning with our system of equations: 

τE

ddt δr E (t) = −δr E (t) + N w EE δr E (t) − N w EI δr I (t)+ N w EE δu E (t),τI

ddt δr I (t) = −δr I (t) + N w IE δr E (t) − N w II δr I (t)+ N w IE δu E (t),

where the pulse injected only into E is, δu E (t) =

Aδ (t), δu I (t) = 0 . So for t > 0,

ddt δr E (t) = N w EE − 1

τE

δr E (t) − N w EI 

τE

δr I (t),ddt δr I (t) = N w IE 

τI

δr E (t) − 1 + N w II 

τI

δr I (t).

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 We want to integrate these equations across time. Con-sider the initial conditions such that the left limits are 0 and the right limits are the jump due to the pulse: 

δr E (0 −) = δr I (0 −) = 0 , and the delta-pulse gives the jump 

δr E (0 +) = AN w EE  

> τE

, δr I (0 +) = AN w IE  

> τI

.

Because we know δr E (t) will be coupled with δr I (t),to get an equation fo E, we will need the evolution equa-tions of the squared perturbations of E, I and the mixed perturbations: 

ddt 

 δr 2

> E

 = 2 δr E

ddt δr E (t)

ddt (δr E δr I ) = ddt δr E (t)δr I + δr E

ddt δr I (t)

ddt 

 δr 2

> I

 = 2 δr I

ddt δr I (t).

Plugging in for dδr E 

> dt

and dδr I 

> dt

we can get: 

ddt 

 δr 2

> E

 = 2 ( N w EE − 1) 

τE

δr 2 

> E

− 2N w EI 

τE

δr E δr I ,ddt (δr E δr I ) = N w IE 

τI

δr 2 

> E

+

 N w EE − 1

τE

− 1 + N w II 

τI



δr E δr I − N w EI 

τE

δr 2 

> I

,ddt 

 δr 2

> I

 = 2N w IE 

τI

δr E δr I − 2 (1 + N w II )

τI

δr 2 

> I

.

Now integrate each from 0 to ∞. Since the fixed point is stable, both perturbations decay to zero as t → ∞ .That gives 

−δr E

 0+2 = 2 ( N w EE − 1) 

τE

Z ∞

> 0

δr 2 

> E

dt 

− 2N w EI 

τE

Z ∞

> 0

δr E δr I dt 

−δr E

 0+δr I

 0+ = N w IE 

τI

Z ∞

> 0

δr 2 

> E

dt 

+

 N w EE − 1

τE

− 1 + N w II 

τI

 Z ∞

> 0

δr E δr I dt −

N w EI 

τE

Z ∞

> 0

δr 2 

> I

dt 

−δr I

 0+2 = 2N w IE 

τI

Z ∞

> 0

δr E δr I dt −

2 (1 + N w II )

τI

Z ∞

> 0

δr 2 

> I

dt 

This is a linear system for the three unknown integrals 

Z ∞

> 0

δr 2 

> E

dt, 

Z ∞

> 0

δr E δr I dt, 

Z ∞

> 0

δr 2 

> I

dt 

Solving that system for the first one gives: 

EE = A2N 2

2

YX .

where 

Y = [ N w EI wIE − wEE (1 + N w II )] 2

+ τI

τE

w2

> EE

(1 − N w EE ) (1 + N w II ) + N 2wEI wIE 



and 

X = [ τI (1 − N w EE ) + τE (1 + N w II )] 

× (1 − N w EE ) (1 + N w II ) + N 2wEI wIE 



Getting this in terms of the propagator, we can consider: 

δ⃗ r(f ) = ∆( f )W⃗g (f )δ⃗ u(f )

δ⃗ r (f ) = (∆( f ) − I)δ⃗ u(f )

Given that 

δ⃗ u(f ) = A

 10



,

we see that δr E (f ) = A (∆ EE (f ) − 1) .

Parseval’s Theorem therefore gives us the energy in terms of the propagator in the frequency domain. 

EE = A2

Z ∞−∞ 

|∆EE (f ) − 1|2 df, 

= A2

Z ∞

> 0+

|∆EE (t) − δ(t)|2 dt 

Some tedious algebra can likewise show that this can be further written in terms of the propagator: 

EE = A2

2det ∆(0) (∆ EE (0) − 1) 2 + τI 

> τE

(det ∆(0) − ∆II (0)) 2

det ∆(0) ( τI ∆II (0) + τE ∆EE (0)) .

4. Relating Propagator to Jacobian 

Likewise, if we want an expression of the propagator in terms of the more familiar Jacobian, we can manipulate 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 the expression a little more: 

δ⃗ r(f ) = ∆( f )W diag( ⃗g (f )) δ⃗ u(f )

δ⃗ r (f ) = 



I − W diag 

 11 + i2πf⃗ τ r

 −1

W

× diag 

 11 + i2πf⃗ τ r



δ⃗ u(f )

δ⃗ r(f ) = W



I − diag 

 11 + i2πf⃗ τ r



W

−1

× diag 

 11 + i2πf⃗ τ r



δ⃗ u(f )

δ⃗ r(f ) = ( I + i2πf diag( ⃗τ r )) ( I + i2πf diag( ⃗τ r ) − W)−1

× W (I + i2πf diag( ⃗τ r )) −1 δ⃗ u(f )

δ⃗ r (f ) = W (I + i2πf diag( ⃗τ r ) − W)−1 δ⃗ u(f )

δ⃗ r (f ) = W(i2πf I − J)−1 diag( ⃗τ r )−1δ⃗ u(f ).

This allows us to quickly see that: 

∆( f )⃗g (f ) = ( i2πf I − J)−1 diag ( ⃗τ r )−1 ,

∆( f )⃗g (f )⃗τ r = ( i2πf I − J)−1.

5. Relaxation Time from the Propagator 

This section is meant to show how to relate the eigen-values of the propagator to the relaxation time of the system in response to a perturbation. We will beging by considering that typically relaxation timescales of a dy-namical system are obtained from the eigenvalues of the Jacobian. Specifically, in response to a perterbation, the evolution of such a perturbation is represented through the Jacobian : 

δ⃗ r (t) = eJt δ⃗ r 0

If we feed a rapid delta function perturbation, because 

W changes only on the plasticity time-scale, J is effec-tively frozen while the δ-step is active. If J is diagonal-isable, J = V ΛV −1 with Λ = diag ( λ+, λ −), then 

eJt = V e ΛtV −1 = V

 eλ+t 00 eλ−t



V −1

Here V is the matrix of column eigenvectors. Let λ+, λ −

be the eigenvalues of J (complex if oscillatory). the two eigenvalues λ+, λ −of J tell one how small perturbations decay (or grow) along two independent directions (the eigenvectors). ⃗δr (t) = a+eλ+t⃗v + + a−eλ−t⃗v −

where a± =⃗v ⊤±⃗r 0.The slow time scale of the perturbation is thus pro-portional to τdecay = 1 

> λ

. The eigenvalue with the small-est magnitude real absolute part will correspond to the slowesr timescale: 

λslow = max  

> i

|R {λi} | 

τdecay = 1

λslow 

.

For our system, the eigenvalues are a complex conjugate pair, so we merely need to find the real component of a given eigenvlaue. This gives us the timescale from the Jacobian itself, but in the subsequent paragraphs, we show how to relate this timescale to the eigenvalues of the propagator ∆( f ).We can first consider the eigenvalue equation of the Jacobian and manipulate it until we have J written di-rectly in terms of the zero-frequency propagator. This is because we can recall we have a relationship between the propagator and the Jacobian: 

∆( f ) diag( ⃗g (f )) diag( τE , τ I ) = ( i2πf I − J)−1.

Therefore, if we evaluate this expression at zero frequency and invert it, we can recover the eigenvalues of the Jaco-bian from the propagator. Evaluating at f = 0 gives 

∆(0) diag( ⃗g (0)) diag( τE , τ I ) = ( −J)−1

∆(0) diag( τE , τ I ) = −J−1.

Now invert both sides: 

[∆(0) diag( τE , τ I )] −1 = −J

diag( τE , τ I )−1∆(0) −1 = −J

− diag( τE , τ I )−1∆(0) −1 = J. 

Now, we can consider an eigenpair of the Jacobian first: 

Jv k = λkvk

− diag( τE , τ I )−1∆(0) −1 vk = λkvk.

Thus, the Jacobian eigenvalues can be written in terms of the propagator as 

λk = eig k

− diag( τE , τ I )−1∆(0) −1 .

We can then manipulate these eigenvalues to be in terms of the decay time: 

τk = − 1Re[ λk]= − 1Re [eig k (− diag( τE , τ I )−1∆(0) −1)] .

The slow relaxation time is set by the eigenvalue whose real part is closest to zero. Therefore, 

τdecay = − 1max k Re [eig k (− diag( τE , τ I )−1∆(0) −1)] ,τdecay = − 1max k Re [ χ(0)] .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

6. Balance index 

Here we simply show the final expression of the balance index in terms of the propagator. From the fixed point equation, we can already use the following: 

r∗ 

> E

= ∆ EE (0) wEX rEX , r∗ 

> I

= ∆ EI (0) wEX rEX .

We can substitute the above into the balance index equation for the mean-field system: 

β = |wEE rE − wEI rI + wEX rEX |

wEE rE + wEX rEX 

.

Then 

β =

|wEE ∆EE (0) wEX rEX − wEI ∆EI (0) wEX rEX + wEX rEX |

wEE ∆EE (0) wEX rEX + wEX rEX 

.

Factor out wEX rEX :

β = |wEX rEX [1 + wEE ∆EE (0) − wEI ∆EI (0)] |

wEX rEX [1 + wEE ∆EE (0)] ,β = |1 + wEE ∆EE (0) − wEI ∆EI (0) |

1 + wEE ∆EE (0) ,β = 1 + wEE ∆EE (0) − wEI ∆EI (0) 1 + wEE ∆EE (0) .

In the last line, we assume the net E input is positive so the absolute value can be dropped. This gives the final expression: 

β = 1 − wEI ∆EI (0) 1 + wEE ∆EE (0) .

7. Trial-to-trial variability 

Now, to model trial-to-trial variability, we consider the mean-field intensity cross-spectrum: 

⟨⃗ Λ,⃗ Λ⟩(f ) = ∆( f ) W⃗g(f )D 0WT⃗g(−f )+ 

WX⃗g (f ) ⟨SX , S X ⟩ (f )⃗g (−f )WTX

 ∆( −f )T

We evaluate the inverse fourier transform of the cross spectrum at 0 lag, which is just the integrated cross spec-trum. We take the first entry of this 2 × 2 matrix is this final quantity that we plot in Fig.6f , which we plot along the line attractor. We clearly see the propagator plays a defining role in shaping the cross spectrum, and thus the trial-to-trial variability. We showed how to get this in the full dimensional case in Appendix G 8. In the next section, we show how to make this a mean-field descrip-tion. 

8. Covariance of the Hawkes process 

One advantage of modeling neural networks with Hawkes processes is the fact that we have a closed form expression for the covariance [72, 73]. The full dimen-sional Hawkes system obeys: ⃗

Λ( t) = W

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM(u) + WX

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dMX (u),

where we denote the spike train from neuron j of pop-ulation α as Sjα(t) = dM jα 

> dt

. We can likewise incorporate this spiking notation directly into the convolution: ⃗

Λ( t) = W

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)S(u)du + WX

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)SX (u)du. 

We relate the intensity of the Hawkes process to a re-alization of the spiking activity via: ⃗S(t) = ⃗ Λ( t) + ξ(t).

The statistics of ξ(t) carries the shot noise informa-tion of the Hawkes process, and satisfy ⟨ξ(t)⟩ = 0 and 

⟨ξ, ξ ⟩(f ) = diag 

⃗

ΛE ,⃗ ΛI



= D0. The second moment comes from the fact that Hawkes processes are condi-tionally independent Poisson processes. The Fourier transform of ⃗ S(t) is simply: ⃗S(f ) = ⃗ Λ( f ) + ⃗ ξ(f )= W⃗g (f )⃗S(f ) + WX⃗g (f )⃗SX (f ) + ξ(f )= ∆( f )



WX⃗g (f )⃗SX (f ) + ⃗ ξ(f )



.

The last line comes from isolating for ⃗ S(f ) and writing 

∆ = ( I − W⃗g (f )) −1. This yields the following expression for the cross-spectrum of ⃗ S(t)

⟨⃗S,⃗ S ⟩(f ) = ∆( f )×

h⃗g (f )WX ⟨⃗SX ,⃗ S X ⟩(f )WTX⃗g (−f ) + D0

i

∆( −f )T .

Likewise, using the definition of the intensity function in Fourier space, we see that: ⃗

Λ = W⃗g (f )⃗S(f ) + WX⃗g (f )⃗SX (f )= W⃗g (f )



Λ( f ) + ξ(f )



+ WX⃗g (f )⃗SX (f )

we can write the intensity function as: ⃗

Λ( f ) = ∆( f )



W⃗g (f )ξ(f ) + WX⃗g (f )⃗SX (f )



.

This gives the cross-spectrum of ⃗ Λ( t) as: 

⟨⃗Λ,⃗ Λ⟩(f ) = ∆( f )

⃗g (f )WD0WT⃗g (−f )+ ⃗g (f )WX ⟨SX , S X ⟩(f )WTX⃗g (−f )



∆( −f )T .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 This subtle difference will allow us to consider how the spike train correlations impact the evolution of the plasticity rule ( ⟨S, S ⟩) and the trial-to-trial variability of the mean firing rate ( ⟨Λ, Λ⟩). Note, this section is the only place where the propagator ∆ is defined in the full dimensional form ∆ = ( I − W⃗g (f )) −1. In subsequent sections, ∆ will refer to the 2 dimensional object in the mean-field picture, namely, ∆ = ( I − W⃗g (f )) −1.

9. Mean-field Covariance 

We will derive the mean-field spike train cross spec-trum of the recurrent Hawkes network here. This will both be useful for the mean-field plasticity rule. We will first take the summed activities of all of the neurons in each population. This will effectively reduce the system to a 2D system. The sum of the Hawkes processes are still Hawkes processes, so we can use the general form of the Hawkes covariance on the 2-dimensional system to obtain the cross spectrum on the summed activities. Then, to obtain the average covariance, we divide by N 2

to get the average covariance between neurons. 

> N

X

> i

ΛiE =

> N

X

> i

 NX

> j

wij EE 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jE (u)

−

> N

X

> j

wij EI 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jI (u)+

> N

X

> j

wij EX 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jX (u)



> N

X

> i

ΛiI =

> N

X

> i

 NX

> j

wij IE 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jE (u)

−

> N

X

> j

wij II 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jI (u)+ 

> N

X

> j

wij IX 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dM jX (u)



Treating each neuron as effectively identical (certainly statistically) and considering that . PNi wij αβ = N w αβ 

where wαβ is the mean connection between population 

β to population α. We also assume the synaptic filtering kernels g(t − u) are identical within a population. 

> N

X

> i

ΛiE = N

 NX

> j

wEE 

Z t

> −∞

gE (t − u)dM jE (u)

−

> N

X

> j

wEI 

Z t

> −∞

gI (t − u)dM jI (u)+ 

> N

X

> j

wEX 

Z t

> −∞

gX (t − u)dM jX (u)



> N

X

> i

ΛiI = N

 NX

> j

wIE 

Z t

> −∞

gE (t − u)dM jE (u)

−

> N

X

> j

wII 

Z t

> −∞

gI (t − u)dM jI (u)+ 

> N

X

> j

wIX 

Z t

> −∞

gX (t − u)dM jX (u)



We can move the sums over j into the integrals 

> N

X

> i

ΛiE = N



wEE 

Z t

> −∞

gE (t − u)

> N

X

> j

dM jE (u)

− wEI 

Z t

> −∞

gI (t − u)

> N

X

> j

dM jI (u)+ 

wEX 

Z t

> −∞

gX (t − u)

> N

X

> j

dM jX (u)



> N

X

> i

ΛiI = N



wIE 

Z t

> −∞

gE (t − u)

> N

X

> j

dM jE (u)

− wII 

Z t

> −∞

gI (t − u)

> N

X

> j

dM jI (u)+ 

wIX 

Z t

> −∞

gX (t − u)

> N

X

> j

dM jX (u)



The above is now effectively a 2 dimensional system of the summed activity. The goal is to compute the spike train cross spectrum of the 2-dimensional system PNi⃗ Λ = [ PNi ΛiE , PNj ΛjI ],which consists of the total activities of the two pop-ulations. We can introduce the notation here that PNj Sjα(u) = PNj dM jα(u)du . The cross spectrum of the summed process is similar to that seen in the previous section: Cov (

> N

X

> i

⃗S, 

> N

X

> i

⃗S)= ( I − W⃗g (f )) −1 (N D 0 + N 2⟨X, X ⟩)  I −⃗g (−f )WT −1 .

Here, ⃗ g (f ) = [ gE (f ), g I (f )] . W = N

wEE −wEI 

wIE −wII 



.

⟨X, X ⟩ is the mean-field cross spectrum of the external 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 population, which the 2×2 matrix. We will calculate this further below. Note though, these terms will correspond to the off-diagonals for the full N ×N matrix, so we would expect to have N (N − 1) terms, which we will take to be roughly N 2 for large enough N. D0 = diag [Λ E , ΛI ] is the diagonal matrix of the mean activity of a neuron, of which we have N diagonal entries. This is the spike train cross spectrum of the summed Hawkes processes, which only relies on the linearity of the Hawkes system. Since we are interested in the average covariance per neuron, we divide by N 2 to obtain: 

⟨S, S ⟩ = 1

N 2 Cov (

> N

X

> i

⃗S, 

> N

X

> i

⃗S)= ( I − W⃗g(f )) −1

 D0

N + ⟨X, X ⟩

  I −⃗g (−f )WT −1 .

Here ∆ = ( I − W⃗g (f )) −1, which is known as the prop-agator. WX = N

wEX 00 wIX 



. Also ⟨SX , S X ⟩ =

 aE 

> N

00 aI

> N



+ σ2 

> 1+(2 πf τ η)2

1 cc 1



.

Now we are almost there. We need to further de-termine what ⟨X, X ⟩ looks like in the mean-field pic-ture. Consider first that the total filtered activity from the connecting external neurons for a given recurrent neuron i in population α can be written as: Xiα(t) = 

PNj wij αX 

R t 

> −∞

g(t − u)dN jX (u) = PNj wij αX g ∗ SjX , but we are going to derive the cross spectrum, which will entail writing X(t) as X(f ) = PNj wij αX ˜g(f )SjX

⟨Xiα, X kβ ⟩ == ⟨

> N

X

> j

wij αX 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dN jX (u),

> N

X

> m

wkm βX 

Z t

> −∞

g(t − u)dN mX (u)⟩

= ⟨

> N

X

> j

wij αX ˜g(f )SjX ,

> N

X

> m

wkm βX ˜g(−f )SmX ⟩

=

> N

X

> j

wij αX ˜g(f )

> N

X

> m

wkm αX ˜g(−f )⟨SjX , S mX ⟩

= |˜g(f )|2

> N

X

> j

wij αX NX

> m

wkm αX ⟨SjX , S mX ⟩

Here ⟨SjX , S mX ⟩ is the mean-field spike train cross spec-trum of the external populations, which in this case are just inhomogeneous Poisson processes. Given we know that ΛpX = ap + √1 − cη p(t) + √cη s(t) where p ∈ E, I 

are the intensity functions for the respective populations. Here ηs(t) and ηp(t) are Ornstein Uhlenbeck noise pro-cesses. We can split the final line into the auto-spectrum terms (of which we will only have a single sum representing the diagonal) and the cross spectrum terms (of which we will have N(N-1) terms). 

= |˜g(f )|2

 NX

> j

wij αX wkj βX ⟨SjX , S jX ⟩ +

> N

X 

> j̸=m

wij αX NX

> m

wkm βX ⟨SjX , S mX ⟩



= |˜g(f )|2



DX

> 0
> N

X

> j

wij αX wkj βX +

> N

X 

> j̸=m

wij αX NX

> m

wkm βx ⟨SjX , S mX ⟩



= |˜g(f )|2



DX 

> 0

N w αX wβX +

> N

X 

> j̸=m

wij αX NX

> m

wkm βX ⟨SjX , S mX ⟩



= |˜g(f )|2



DX 

> 0

N w αx wβx + ⟨SX , S X ⟩N (N − 1) wαX wβX 



= ˜ g(f )WX (N D X 

> 0

+ N (N − 1) ⟨SX , S X ⟩)W TX ˜g(−f )

Here the auto-spectrum is the diagonal of the exter-nal neural activities - which for Poisson neurons is just the firing mean rate such that DX 

> 0

= [aE , a I ]. Fur-ther, wij αX and wij βX have been replaced with it’s mean value ⟨wij αX ⟩ = wαX where wαX is the mean connec-tion from population x to α. Because we use weights selected from a Gaussian distribution, this would hold for a large network. Here ⟨SX , S X ⟩ is the average co-variance between external populations. Because we have two external populations, this is a 2 × 2 matrix such that 

⟨SX , S X ⟩ = σ2 

> 1+(2 πf τ η)2

1 cc 1



.

This is if σ = σs for the OU pro-cesses. If they are different then ⟨SX , S X ⟩ = 

> 11+(2 πf τ η)2

(1 − cx)σ2 + cxσ2 

> s

cxσ2

> s

cxσ2 

> s

(1 − cx)σ2 + cxσ2

> s



."

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

[1] G. Buzsáki, Neural syntax: cell assemblies, synapsem-bles, and readers, Neuron 68 , 362 (2010). [2] H. Eichenbaum, Barlow versus hebb: When is it time to abandon the notion of feature detectors and adopt the cell assembly as the unit of cognition?, Neuroscience Letters 680 , 88 (2018), new Perspectives on the Hip-pocampus and Memory. [3] A. Holtmaat and P. Caroni, Functional and structural underpinnings of neuronal assembly formation in learn-ing, Nature neuroscience 19 , 1553 (2016). [4] K. D. Harris, J. Csicsvari, H. Hirase, G. Dragoi, and G. Buzsáki, Organization of cell assemblies in the hip-pocampus, Nature 424 , 552 (2003). [5] J. E. K. Miller, I. Ayzenshtat, L. Carrillo-Reid, and R. Yuste, Visual stimuli recruit intrinsically gener-ated cortical ensembles, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , E4053 (2014). [6] R. Cossart, D. Aronov, and R. Yuste, Attractor dynam-ics of network UP states in the neocortex, Nature 423 ,283 (2003). [7] X. Liu, S. Ramirez, P. T. Pang, C. B. Puryear, A. Govin-darajan, K. Deisseroth, and S. Tonegawa, Optogenetic stimulation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory recall, Nature 484 , 381 (2012). [8] L. Carrillo-Reid, Neuronal ensembles in memory pro-cesses, Seminars in Cell and Developmental Biology 

125 , 136 (2022). [9] S. A. Josselyn and P. W. Frankland, Memory alloca-tion: mechanisms and function, Annual Review of Neu-roscience 41 , 389 (2018). [10] K. D. Harris, Neural signatures of cell assembly organi-zation, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6, 399 (2005). [11] C. Miehl, S. Onasch, D. Festa, and J. Gjorgjieva, For-mation and computational implications of assemblies in neural circuits, The Journal of Physiology 601 , 3071 (2023). [12] A. Litwin-Kumar and B. Doiron, Formation and main-tenance of neuronal assemblies through synaptic plas-ticity, Nature Communications 5, 5319 (2014). [13] G. K. Ocker and B. Doiron, Training and spontaneous reinforcement of neuronal assemblies by spike timing plasticity, Nature Communications 12 , 1 (2019). [14] B. Babadi and L. F. Abbott, Pairwise analysis can ac-count for network structures arising from spike-timing dependent plasticity, PLoS Computational Biology 9,e1002906 (2013). [15] K. D. Harris and T. D. Mrsic-Flogel, Cortical connec-tivity and sensory coding, Nature 503 , 51 (2013). [16] C. J. Shatz, The developing brain, Scientific American 

267 , 60 (1992). [17] D. O. Hebb, The Organization of Behavior (John Wiley, New York, 1949). [18] H. Ko, S. B. Hofer, B. Pichler, K. A. Buchanan, P. J. Sjöström, and T. D. Mrsic-Flogel, Functional specificity of local synaptic connections in neocortical networks, Nature 473 , 87 (2011). [19] W. C. A. Lee, V. Bonin, M. Reed, B. J. Graham, G. Hood, K. Glattfelder, and R. C. Reid, Anatomy and function of an excitatory network in the visual cortex, Nature 532 , 370 (2016), publisher:. [20] Z. Ding, P. G. Fahey, S. Papadopoulos, et al. , Functional connectomics reveals general wiring rule in mouse visual cortex, Nature 640 , 459 (2025). [21] Y. Yoshimura, J. L. M. Dantzker, and E. M. Callaway, Excitatory cortical neurons form fine-scale functional networks, Nature 433 , 868 (2005). [22] L. F. Abbott and S. B. Nelson, Synaptic plasticity: tam-ing the beast, Nature Neuroscience 3, 1178 (2000). [23] F. Zenke, E. J. Agnes, and W. Gerstner, Diverse synap-tic plasticity mechanisms orchestrated to form and re-trieve memories in spiking neural networks, Nature Communications 6, 10.1038/ncomms7922 (2015). [24] K. Miller and D. MacKay, The role of constraints in hebbian learning, Neural Computation 6, 100 (1994). [25] F. Zenke and W. Gerstner, Hebbian plasticity requires compensatory processes on multiple timescales, Philo-sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 372 , 20160259 (2017). [26] E. L. Bienenstock, L. N. Cooper, and P. W. Munro, Theory for the development of neuron selectivity: ori-entation specificity and binocular interaction in visual cortex, The Journal of Neuroscience 2, 32 (1982). [27] P. Yger, M. Stimberg, and R. Brette, Fast Learning with Weak Synaptic Plasticity, Journal of Neuroscience 35 ,13351 (2015). [28] X. Yang and B. Doiron, Causal spike timing-dependent plasticity prevents assembly fusion in recurrent net-works, PRX Life 4, 013011 (2026). [29] G. G. Turrigiano, Homeostatic plasticity in neuronal networks: the more things change, the more they stay the same, Trends in Neurosciences 22 , 221 (1999). [30] G. G. Turrigiano, The Self-Tuning Neuron: Synaptic Scaling of Excitatory Synapses, Cell 135 , 422 (2008). [31] G. S. Lynch, T. Dunwiddie, and V. Gribkoff, Heterosy-naptic depression: a postsynaptic correlate of long-term potentiation, Nature 266 , 737 (1977). [32] M. Chistiakova, N. M. Bannon, J.-Y. Chen, M. Bazhenov, and M. Volgushev, Homeostatic role of heterosynaptic plasticity: models and ex-periments, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience 9,10.3389/fncom.2015.00089 (2015). [33] G. G. Turrigiano, The dialectic of hebb and homeosta-sis, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 372 , 20160258 (2017). [34] T. Keck, T. Toyoizumi, L. Chen, B. Doiron, D. E. Feld-man, K. Fox, W. Gerstner, P. G. Haydon, M. Hübener, H. K. Lee, J. E. Lisman, T. Rose, F. Sengpiel, D. Stell-wagen, M. P. Stryker, G. G. Turrigiano, and M. C. van Rossum, Integrating hebbian and homeostatic plastic-ity: The current state of the field and future research directions, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal So-ciety B: Biological Sciences 372 , 20160158 (2017). [35] T. P. Vogels, H. Sprekeler, F. Zenke, C. Clopath, and W. Gerstner, Inhibitory plasticity balances excitation and inhibition in sensory pathways and memory net-works, Science 334 , 1569 (2011). [36] Y. Luz and M. Shamir, Balancing feed-forward exci-tation and inhibition via hebbian inhibitory synaptic plasticity, PLOS Computational Biology 8, e1002334 (2012). [37] C. Miehl and J. Gjorgjieva, Stability and learning in excitatory synapses by nonlinear inhibitory plasticity, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

PLOS Computational Biology (2022). [38] E. J. Agnes and T. P. Vogels, Co-dependent excita-tory and inhibitory plasticity accounts for quick, stable and long-lasting memories in biological networks, Na-ture Neuroscience 27 , 964 (2024). [39] M. A. Woodin, K. Ganguly, and M.-M. Poo, Coincident Pre- and Postsynaptic Activity Modifies GABAergic Synapses by Postsynaptic Changes in Cl- Transporter Activity, Neuron 39 , 807 (2003), publisher: {BV}. [40] J. A. D’amour and R. C. Froemke, Inhibitory and Exci-tatory Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity in the Audi-tory Cortex, Neuron 86 , 514 (2015), publisher: {BV}. [41] M. Udakis, V. Pedrosa, S. E. L. Chamberlain, C. Clopath, and J. R. Mellor, Interneuron-specific plasticity at parvalbumin and somatostatin in-hibitory synapses onto CA1 pyramidal neurons shapes hippocampal output, Nature Communications 11 ,10.1038/s41467-020-18074-8 (2020). [42] F. Lagzi, M. Canto-Bustos, A.-M. M. Oswald, and B. Doiron, Assembly formation is stabilized by Parval-bumin neurons and accelerated by Somatostatin neu-rons, bioRxiv 10.1101/2021.09.06.459211 ; (2021). [43] R. E. Field, J. A. D’amour, R. Tremblay, C. Miehl, B. Rudy, J. Gjorgjieva, and R. C. Froemke, Heterosy-naptic Plasticity Determines the Set Point for Cortical Excitatory-Inhibitory Balance, Neuron 106 , 842 (2020), publisher: Inc. [44] C. R. Froemke, M. M. Merzenich, and E. C. Shreiner, A synaptic memory trace for cortical receptive field plas-ticity, Nature 450 , 425 (2007). [45] R. C. Froemke, Plasticity of Cortical Excitatory-Inhibitory Balance, Annual Review of Neuroscience 38 ,195 (2015). [46] G. Hennequin, E. J. Agnes, and T. P. Vogels, Inhibitory Plasticity: Balance, Control, and Codependence, An-nual Review of Neuroscience 40 , 557 (2017), publisher: Annual Reviews. [47] F. Effenberger, J. Jost, and A. Levina, Self-organization in balanced state networks by STDP and homeostatic plasticity, PLOS Computational Biology 11 , e1004420 (2015). [48] A. Morrison, A. Aertsen, and M. Diesmann, Spike-timing-dependent plasticity in balanced random net-works, Neural Computation 19 , 1437 (2007). [49] S. Eckmann, E. J. Young, and J. Gjorgjieva, Synapse-type-specific competitive hebbian learning forms func-tional recurrent networks, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121 , e2305326121 (2024). [50] M. Chistiakova, N. M. Bannon, J.-Y. Chen, M. Bazhenov, and M. Volgushev, Homeostatic role of heterosynaptic plasticity: models and experiments, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience Volume 9 -2015 , 10.3389/fncom.2015.00089 (2015). [51] R. Gütig, R. Aharonov, S. Rotter, and H. Sompolinsky, Learning input correlations through nonlinear tempo-rally asymmetric hebbian plasticity, Journal of Neuro-science 23 , 3697 (2003). [52] M. J. Fauth and M. C. W. van Rossum, Self-organized reactivation maintains and reinforces memories despite synaptic turnover, eLife 8, e43717 (2019). [53] S. Song, K. D. Miller, and L. F. Abbott, Competi-tive hebbian learning through Spike-Timing-Dependent synaptic plasticity, Nature Neuroscience 3, 919 (2000). [54] S. Soldado-Magraner, M. J. Seay, R. Laje, and D. V. Buonomano, Paradoxical self-sustained dynam-ics emerge from orchestrated excitatory and inhibitory homeostatic plasticity rules, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 , e2200621119 (2022). [55] J. H. Reynolds and D. J. Heeger, The normalization model of attention, Neuron 61 , 168 (2009). [56] A. Kohn, Visual adaptation: Physiology, mechanisms, and functional benefits, Journal of Neurophysiology 97 ,3155 (2007), 10.1152/jn.00086.2007. [57] P.-O. Polack, J. Friedman, and P. Golshani, Cellular mechanisms of brain state–dependent gain modulation in visual cortex, Nature Neuroscience 16 , 1331 (2013). [58] S. Treue and J. C. Martinez Trujillo, Feature-based at-tention influences motion processing gain in macaque visual cortex, Nature 399 , 575 (1999). [59] D. H. Hubel and T. N. Wiesel, Receptive fields, binoc-ular interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex, The Journal of Physiology 160 , 106 (1962). [60] C. J. McAdams and J. H. R. Maunsell, Effects of atten-tion on orientation-tuning functions of single neurons in macaque cortical area v4, Journal of Neuroscience 19 ,431 (1999). [61] A. W. Thompson and E. K. Scott, Characterisation of sensitivity and orientation tuning for visually responsive ensembles in the zebrafish tectum, Scientific Reports 6,34887 (2016). [62] Y. Ziv, L. D. Burns, E. D. Cocker, E. O. Hamel, K. K. Ghosh, L. J. Kitch, A. El Gamal, and M. J. Schnitzer, Long-term dynamics of CA1 hippocampal place codes, Nature Neuroscience 16 , 264 (2013). [63] G. Delamare, D. Feitosa Tomé, and C. Clopath, In-trinsic neural excitability biases allocation and over-lap of memory engrams, Journal of Neuroscience 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0846-23.2024 (2022). [64] R. Kiani and M. N. Shadlen, Representation of confi-dence associated with a decision by neurons in the pari-etal cortex, Science 324 , 759 (2009). [65] C. D. Brody, R. Romo, and A. Kepecs, Basic mech-anisms for graded persistent activity: discrete attrac-tors, continuous attractors, and dynamic representa-tions, Current Opinion in Neurobiology 13 , 204 (2003). [66] Z. P. Kilpatrick, B. Ermentrout, and B. Doiron, Opti-mizing working memory with heterogeneity of recurrent cortical excitation, Journal of Neuroscience 33 , 18999 (2013). [67] P. Miller and X.-J. Wang, Power-law neuronal fluc-tuations in a recurrent network model of parametric working memory, Journal of Neurophysiology 95 , 1099 (2005), pMID: 16236788. [68] A. Polk, A. Litwin-Kumar, and B. Doiron, Correlated neural variability in persistent state networks, Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 , 6295 (2012). [69] A. Renart, P. Song, and X.-J. Wang, Robust spatial working memory through homeostatic synaptic scal-ing in heterogeneous cortical networks, Neuron 38 , 473 (2003). [70] B. Doiron, A. Litwin-Kumar, R. Rosenbaum, G. K. Ocker, and K. Jošić, The mechanics of state-dependent neural correlations, Nature Neuroscience 19 , 383 (2017). [71] T. Tetzlaff, M. Helias, G. T. Einevoll, and M. Diesmann, Decorrelation of neural-network activity by inhibitory feedback, PLOS Computational Biology 8, e1002596 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

(2012). [72] A. G. Hawkes, Spectra of some self-exciting and mutu-ally exciting point processes, Biometrika 58 , 83 (1971). [73] A. Hawkes, Point spectra of some mutually exciting point processes, Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-ety. Series B 33 (1971). [74] Z. Brzosko, S. B. Mierau, and O. Paulsen, Neuro-modulation of spike-timing-dependent plasticity: past, present, and future, Neuron 103 , 563 (2019). [75] M. Graupner and A. Reyes, Synaptic input correlations leading to membrane potential decorrelation of spon-taneous activity in cortex, Journal of Neuroscience 33 ,15075 (2013). [76] M. C. W. van Rossum, G. Q. Bi, and G. G. Turrigiano, Stable hebbian learning from spike timing-dependent plasticity, Journal of Neuroscience 20 , 8812 (2000). [77] R. Kempter, W. Gerstner, and J. L. van Hemmen, Heb-bian learning and spiking neurons, Phys. Rev. E 59 ,4498 (1999). [78] M. Gilson, A. N. Burkitt, D. B. Grayden, D. A. Thomas, and J. L. van Hemmen, Emergence of network struc-ture due to spike-timing-dependent plasticity in recur-rent neuronal networks IV: Structuring synaptic path-ways among recurrent connections, Biological Cybernet-ics 101 , 427 (2009), epub 2009-11-24. [79] R. Kempter, W. Gerstner, and J. L. v. Hem-men, Intrinsic stabilization of output rates by spike-based hebbian learning, Neural Computation 

13 , 2709 (2001), https://direct.mit.edu/neco/article-pdf/13/12/2709/815009/089976601317098501.pdf. [80] A. E. Akil, R. Rosenbaum, and K. Josić, Balanced networks under spike-time dependent plasticity, PLOS Computational Biology 17 , 1 (2021). [81] R. K. Mishra, S. Kim, S. J. Guzman, and P. Jonas, Sym-metric spike timing-dependent plasticity at CA3–CA3 synapses optimizes storage and recall in autoassociative networks, Nature Communications 7, 11552 (2016). [82] P. Manz and R.-M. Memmesheimer, Purely stdp-based assembly dynamics: Stability, learning, overlaps, drift and aging, PLOS Computational Biology 19 , e1011006 (2023). [83] Y. K. Wu, C. Miehl, and J. Gjorgjieva, Regulation of circuit organization and function through inhibitory synaptic plasticity, Trends in Neurosciences 45 , 884 (2022). [84] J.-P. Pfister and W. Gerstner, Triplets of spikes in a model of spike timing-dependent plasticity, Journal of Neuroscience 26 , 9673 (2006). [85] J. Gjorgjieva, C. Clopath, J. Audet, and J.-P. Pfister, A triplet spike-timing–dependent plasticity model gen-eralizes the bienenstock–cooper–munro rule to higher-order spatiotemporal correlations, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 , 19383 (2011). [86] Y. Ahmadian and K. D. Miller, What is the dynamical regime of cerebral cortex?, Neuron 109 , 3373 (2021). [87] Y. Ahmadian, D. B. Rubin, and K. D. Miller, Analysis of the stabilized supralinear network, Neural Computa-tion 25 , 1994 (2013). [88] M. Okun and I. Lampl, Instantaneous correlation of excitation and inhibition during ongoing and sensory-evoked activities, Nature Neuroscience 11 , 535 (2008). [89] J. J. Hopfield, Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities., Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 79 , 2554 (1982). [90] A. Treves and E. T. Rolls, Computational constraints suggest the need for two distinct input systems to the hippocampal ca3 network, Hippocampus 2, 189 (1992). [91] J. J. Knierim and J. P. Neunuebel, Tracking the flow of hippocampal computation: Pattern separation, pat-tern completion, and attractor dynamics, Neurobiology of Learning and Memory 129 , 38 (2016), pattern Sep-aration and Pattern Completion in the Hippocampal System. [92] B. D. Philpot, J. S. Espinosa, and M. F. Bear, Evidence for altered nmda receptor function as a basis for meta-plasticity in visual cortex, Journal of Neuroscience 23 ,5583 (2003). [93] A. Kirkwood, M. Rioult, and M. F. Bear, Experience-dependent modification of synaptic plasticity in visual cortex, Nature 381 , 526 (1996). [94] L. N. Cooper and M. F. Bear, The bcm theory of synapse modification at 30: interaction of theory with experiment, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 13 , 798 (2012). [95] C. Clopath, T. P. Vogels, R. C. Froemke, and H. Sprekeler, Receptive field formation by interacting excitatory and inhibitory synaptic plasticity, bioRxiv 10.1101/066589 (2016). [96] L. Montangie, C. Miehl, and J. Gjorgjieva, Autonomous emergence of connectivity assemblies via spike triplet interactions, PLoS Computational Biology 16 , e1007835 (2020). [97] G. K. Ocker, Y. Hu, M. A. Buice, B. Doiron, K. Josić, R. Rosenbaum, and E. Shea-Brown, From the statistics of connectivity to the statistics of spike times in neu-ronal networks, Current Opinion in Neurobiology 46 ,109 (2017). [98] J. Trousdale, Y. Hu, E. Shea-Brown, and K. Jošić, Impact of network structure and cellular response on spike time correlations, PLoS Computational Biology 

8, e1002408 (2012). [99] V. Pernice, B. Staude, S. Cardanobile, and S. Rotter, How structure determines correlations in neuronal net-works, PLoS computational biology 7, e1002059 (2011). [100] B. Lindner, B. Doiron, and A. Longtin, Theory of os-cillatory firing induced by spatially correlated noise and delayed inhibitory feedback, Phys. Rev. E 72 , 061919 (2005). [101] B. Doiron, B. Lindner, A. Longtin, L. Maler, and J. Bas-tian, Oscillatory activity in electrosensory neurons in-creases with the spatial correlation of the stochastic in-put stimulus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 , 048101 (2004). [102] A. S. Ecker, P. Berens, G. A. Keliris, M. Bethge, N. K. Logothetis, and A. S. Tolias, Decorrelated neuronal fir-ing in cortical microcircuits, Science 327 , 584 (2010). [103] A. Renart, J. de la Rocha, P. Bartho, L. Hollender, N. Parga, A. Reyes, and K. D. Harris, The asynchronous state in cortical circuits, Science 327 , 587 (2010). [104] W. Bair, E. Zohary, and W. T. Newsome, Correlated firing in macaque visual area mt: Time scales and rela-tionship to behavior, Journal of Neuroscience 21 , 1676 (2001). [105] M. R. Cohen and A. Kohn, Measuring and interpret-ing neuronal correlations, Nature Neuroscience 14 , 811 (2011). [106] M. Helias, T. Tetzlaff, and M. Diesmann, The corre-lation structure of local neuronal networks intrinsically 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 22, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.31.729097 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

results from recurrent dynamics, PLoS Computational Biology 10 , e1003428 (2014). [107] L. Chen, T. R. Fransisco, A. Baggetta, Y. Zaki, Z. Dong, S. Ramirez, R. L. Clem, T. Shuman, and D. J. Cai, Ensemble-specific deficit in neuronal intrinsic excitabil-ity in aged mice, Neurobiology of Aging 123 , 92 (2023). [108] J. de la Rocha, B. Doiron, E. Shea-Brown, K. Josić, and A. Reyes, Correlation between neural spike trains increases with firing rate, Nature 448 , 802 (2007). [109] N. Ravid Tannenbaum and Y. Burak, Shaping neural circuits by high order synaptic interactions, PLoS Com-putational Biology 12 , e1005056 (2016). [110] G. K. Ocker, A. Litwin-Kumar, and B. Doiron, Self-organization of microcircuits in networks of spiking neu-rons with plastic synapses, PLoS Computational Biol-ogy 11 , e1004458 (2015). [111] R. L. Goris, J. A. Movshon, and E. P. Simoncelli, Par-titioning neuronal variability, Nature neuroscience 17 ,858 (2014). [112] R. G. Turcott, S. B. Lowen, E. Li, D. H. Johnson, C. Tsuchitani, and M. C. Teich, A nonstationary poisson point process describes the sequence of action potentials over long time scales in lateral-superior-olive auditory neurons, Biological cybernetics 70 , 209 (1994). [113] M. Wehr and A. M. Zador, Balanced inhibition underlies tuning and sharpens spike timing in auditory cortex, Nature 426 , 442 (2003). [114] H. Seung, How the brain keeps the eyes still, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 , 13339 (1996). [115] S. Lim and M. S. Goldman, Balanced cortical microcir-cuitry for maintaining information in working memory, Nature Neuroscience 16 , 1306 (2013). [116] S. J. Kuhlman, N. D. Olivas, E. Tring, T. Ikrar, X. Xu, and J. T. Trachtenberg, A disinhibitory microcircuit ini-tiates critical-period plasticity in the visual cortex, Na-ture 501 , 543 (2013). [117] N. Brunel, Dynamics of sparsely connected networks of excitatory and inhibitory spiking neurons, Journal of Computational Neuroscience 8, 183 (2000). [118] R. Rosenbaum, J. Rubin, and B. Doiron, Short term synaptic depression imposes a frequency dependent fil-ter on synaptic information transfer, PLoS Computa-tional Biology 8, e1002557 (2012). [119] M. Noorman, B. K. Hulse, V. Jayaraman, S. Romani, and A. M. Hermundstad, Maintaining and updating ac-curate internal representations of continuous variables with a handful of neurons, Nature Neuroscience 27 ,2207 (2024). [120] C. H. Papadimitriou, S. S. Vempala, D. Mitropolsky, M. Collins, and W. Maass, Brain computation by assem-blies of neurons, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 , 14464 (2020). [121] S. Onasch, C. Miehl, M. M. Miękus, and J. Gjorgjieva, Assembly-based computations through contextual den-dritic gating of plasticity, bioRxiv (2025). [122] V. Pedrosa and C. Clopath, Interplay between somatic and dendritic inhibition promotes the emergence and stabilization of place fields, PLoS Computational Biol-ogy 16 , e1007955 (2020). [123] C. Kuehn, Multiple Time Scale Dynamics , Applied Mathematical Sciences, Vol. 191 (Springer, Cham, 2015) pp. 1–814. [124] N. Fenichel, Geometric singular perturbation theory for ordinary differential equations, Journal of Differential Equations 31 , 53 (1979).