Title: Rapid value learning reveals generalized and context-dependent codes in frontal cortex

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027v1.full.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 04 Jul 2026 20:40:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
1

Rapid value learning reveals generali zed and context -dependent codes in 

frontal cortex 

Elena Gutierrez 1,‡ , Timothy H. Muller 1, James L. Butler 1, W. M. Nishantha 

Malalasekera 2, Laurence T. Hunt 1,3 , Sebastijan Veselic 1,† and Steve n W. Kennerley 1,2 ,† 

1. Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3SR, UK 

2. Institute of Neurology, Department of Clinical and Movement Neurosciences, University College 

London , London WC1N 3BG, UK 

3. University of Oxford Centre for Integrative Neuroimaging, University of Oxford, FMRIB, John Radcliffe 

Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK 

† Equal contribution 

‡ Lead contact : elena.gutierrez@psy.ox.ac.uk 

Abstract 

Studying how the brain represents value spans distinct methods and training histories, 

from neuroimaging in task -naïve humans to single -neuron recordings in extensively 

trained non -human primates. Similar findings across fields have encouraged the untested 

assumption that rapidly emerging and overtrained value representations are equivalent. 

Here we recorded single -neuron activity in anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and 

orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) as macaques learned novel cue values and chose between novel 

and overtrained cues. Value responses emerged within 4 -7 cue presentations, matching 

behavioural adaptation. Yet ACC and OFC used distinct codes. ACC encoded value in a 

common format that generalised across training history. OFC coding was more context -

depe ndent, with distinct subpopulations recruited by choice experience. Choice novelty 

was also encoded independently of value before chosen value signals emerged. During 

learning, ACC responses shifted from overtrained secondary reinforcers to newly 

predictiv e cues. These findings establish the necessary (rapid acquisition) and sufficient 

(generalised format) conditions for comparing value representations across methods, 

species, and training histories. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Introduction 

The ability to assign value to newly encountered options is essential to flexible choice . The 

anterior cingulate (ACC ) and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) have been consistently 

implicated in value -guided computations in both human and non -human primates 

(Ballesta et al., 2020; Enel et al., 2020; Hunt et al., 2018; Kennerley et al., 2011; Klein -

Flugge et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2012) . While studies in both species largely support each 

other’s findings, methodologies are at odds. In non -human primates (NHPs) , single -cell 

data have been mostly obtained once animals reach a high -performance criterion after 

experiencing the task, choices and task conditions thousands of times. More recent 

studies have examined changes in neural responses as animals acquire novel value -guided 

tasks from scratch, but still typically do so across weeks of extensive training (Liebana et 

al., 2025; Wojcik et al., 2026) . Though extensive training ensure s precise behavioural 

control , this bear s little resemblance to human neuroimaging experiments, where 

participants often experience the task for the first time on the day of data collection. As a 

result, it remains a pro minent but largely untested assumption t hat the over trained 

representations of value reported in NHP neurons underlie the newly -learned 

representations of value observed in human neuroimaging studies . Demonstrating such 

similarity would therefore not only strengthen evidence for cross -method and cross -

species parallel isms , but also reveal the type of rapid value acquisition that is essential to 

adaptive decision -making .

The assumption that novel and overtrained value representations are similar is 

non -trivial, because value -related responses in frontal cortex (FC) are modulated by 

novelty, experience, and task state (Barron et al., 2013; Costa & Averbeck, 2020; Elston & 

Wallis, 2025; Wilson et al., 2014) , raising the possibility that newly acquired and 

overtrained values rely on distinct neural codes. If, for instance, objects are tagged as 

novel, increased attentional resources may be devoted to them to reduce uncertainty in 

the environment, thus maximising future reward. Indeed, incorporating novelty in 

reinforcement learning algorithms has proven eff ective in driving learning through 

increased exploration (Jaegle et al., 2019) . The FC has been shown to be involved in 

novelty detection through interaction with the medial temporal lobe (Daffner et al., 2000; 

Garrido et al., 2015; Kafkas & Montaldi, 2014; Matsumoto, Matsumoto, & Tanaka, 2007; 

Ranganath & Rainer, 2003) . Neurons in the OFC particularly support exploration of novel 

options (Costa & Averbeck, 2020) and, in humans, the medial frontal cortex is 

preferentially recruited during consideration of novel experiences (Barron et al., 2013) ,

with value -related signals here diminish ing with training (Hunt et al., 2012) . Taken 

together, t hese results demonstrate novelty may be a salient signal for PFC neurons. More 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

broadly, the fact that FC responses are modulated by experie nce (Asaad et al., 1998; Cole 

et al., 2010; Rainer & Miller, 2000) , and that OFC responses may be state -dependent 

(Elston & Wallis, 2025; Wilson et al., 2014) , reinforces the question of whether novelty 

and training experience also affect value -guided computations. Consistent with this, 

Bongioanni et al. (2021) used functional MRI to show how population responses in the 

medial frontal cortex may encode the value of novel options by presenting NHPs with 

previously unencountered combinations of reward -predicting stimuli. Extending a

similar approach to electrophysiological recordings may therefore reveal how neurons 

encode novelty, whether these representations are independent of value -related signals 

and/or whether novel choice differentially biases value responses of frontal subregions ,

shedding light on the neural mechanisms that support rapid , flexible choice .

More fundamentally, if novelty and training experience shape frontal value coding, 

how are value representations acquired as novel stimuli become behaviourally 

meaningful? One influential framework for value learning, temporal -difference 

reinforcement learning (TDRL), predicts that as reward becomes associated with a cue, 

value -related neural responses should shift backwards in time from the reward itself to 

earlier reward -predicting events (Amo et al., 2022; Sutton, 1988) . Mechanisms consistent 

with this account have been extensively characterised in midbrain dopamine neurons, 

which encode reward prediction errors (RPEs) by signalling the discrepancy between 

predicted and obtained reward (Schultz et al., 1993; Schultz et al., 1997) , and can acquire 

responses to novel reward -predicting stimuli over repeated exposures via secondary 

reinforcers (Hollerman & Schultz, 1998) . Because the midbrain dopamine system 

projects widely to frontal cortex (Williams & Goldman -Rakic, 1998) , and particularly to 

ACC (Averbeck et al., 2014) , s imilar error -driven dynamics may contribute to the 

acquisition of value representations in frontal neurons. This possibility is supported by 

evidence that ACC disruption impair s the integration of reinforcement information 

during learning (Amiez et al., 2006; Camille et al., 2011; Kennerley et al., 2006) , that ACC 

neurons encode RPEs during action - and rule -learning (Cole et al., 2024; Matsumoto, 

Matsumoto, et al., 2007; Seo & Lee, 2007) , and that ACC value responses reflect 

discrepancies between expected and obtained reward during choice (Kennerley et al., 

2011; Muller et al., 2024) . Crucially, however, these findings largely involve cues, actions 

or task structures that had already been extensively experienced before recordings began. 

Therefore, while our task does not by itself identify the precise learning algorithm, it 

allows us to test whether a core signature asso ciated with TDRL (i.e. the temporal transfer 

of value coding from known reward -predicting events to newly learned cues ) is evident in 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

frontal neurons , and whether such dynamics occur over timescales fast enough to support 

rapid behavioural adaptation .

Here, we addressed these issues by recording the activity of single neurons in ACC 

and OFC while two non -human primates (Macaca mulatta ) first learned novel cue -value 

associations through secondary conditioning , and then made choices between the newly 

learned cues and/ or overtrained cues. We report the clear emergence of value signals 

associated with the novel cues as rapidly as within just four cue presentations , on 

approximately the same timescale as behavioural adaptation . In ACC neurons , the 

association of value with novel cues coincided with a decrease in value coding at the 

secondary reinforcer , as predicted by TDRL . Upon choice , ACC used a strikingly similar 

value code for both novel and overtrained choices, whereas OFC recruited distinct 

subpopulations according to level of experience. OFC also strongly encoded novelty of the 

choice independently of value. 

Results 

Two subjects (F and M) learn ed novel stimuli associated with five different sizes or 

probabilities of reward (Fig. 1a -c). Each session (F: n = 8, M: n = 13), ten novel cues were 

learned through completion of 100 Conditioning trials (‘Conditioning phase’ , Fig. 1a -b),

consisting of forced choice of a cue, followed by presentation of a secondary reinforcer 

which represented the reward magnitude or probability predicted by the cue. 

Conditioning trials were grouped into ten blocks for each attribute, consisting of five 

Co nditioning trials – one for each reward level – as well as two Probe Choice trials 

between cues from that attribute ( n = 40 /session). Subjects were rapidly able to choose 

the correct option , performing above chance within 3 -5 cue presentations (mean accuracy 

± S.E.M. on Probe Choice trials , averaged across sessions, F: 70.3 ± 5. 7% by 5-6

presentations , p = 0.007 , M: 63.5 ± 5.2 % by 3 -4 presentations , p = 0.041 ; one -sample t-

tests, Bonferroni -corrected within subject; Fig. 2b). A notable feature of the secondary 

reinforcer is that it allow s for equally rapid acquisition of both probability and magnitude 

information. Multiple trials are typically required to reliably estimate probability 

information (but not magnitude) ; the presence of the secondary reinforcer remove s this 

ambiguity, as the height of the secondar y reinforcer reflects the true expected value of the 

primary reinforcer. Consistent with this , Probe choice performance did not significantly 

differ between magnitude and probability trials during either early or late conditioning 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

Figure 1. Task. a , Task design. During each session, subjects  learnt the value associated with 

novel cues predicting different sizes or probabilities of reward (‘Conditioning phase’). Subjects 

were then offered choices between two cues they learned that session (Novel trials), between 

two cues they experienced 1000s of times before (Overtrained trials) or between one of each 

(Mixed trials) (‘Choice phase’). b, Conditioning phase structure. Each novel cue was presented 

10 times, for a total of 10 blocks for each attribute (magnitude and probability). Each block 

consisted of a Conditioning trial for each of the 5 stimuli of an attribute, followed by two probe 

Ch oice trials from this attribute. Blocks alternated between magnitude and probability trials, 

with the first being randomly determined (magnitude in this example). c, Left: in Choice trials, 

subjects chose between two cues of the same attribute (magnitude or probability) by joystick 

movement, followed by reward outcome associated with the chosen cue. Right: during 

Conditioning trials, each novel cue was paired with an overlearned secondary reinforcer which 

indicated the novel cue’s value. Corresponding reward outcome followed a forced choice of the 

cue by manual joystick movement. d, Example stimuli. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

(F, presentations 1 -3: t(7) = -2.35 , p = 0. 10 , presentations 7 -10: t(7) = 0, p = 1; M,

presentations 1 -3: t(1 2) = 0.50 , p = 1, presentations 7 -10: t(1 2) = 2.51 , p = 0. 06 ; paired 

t-test, Bonferroni -corrected within -subject ; Fig. 2 c); we therefor e c ollapse d across these 

two types of stimul i in many of the subsequent analyses. 

The Conditioning phase was followed by a Choice phase, where subjects were 

presented with novel choices (between cues learned that day , Novel trials ) or overtrained 

choices (between the same , extensively learned cues , Overtrained , or OT, trials ). After cue 

presentation, subjects could freely view the stimuli until they chose to indicate their 

decision with a lever pull (mean reaction time ± SEM , F: 547 ± 7ms , M: 481 ± 2ms ). We 

previously reported on behavioural analyses of the Choice phase , finding that initial 

saccades during choice were value -driven, and that NHPs have a strong bias towards 

Figure 2. Recording locations and learning behaviour. a , Recording locations of ACC 

and OFC neurons, shown in coronal sections. Anterior –posterior (AP) range indicates the 

position anterior to the interaural plane in stereotactic coordinates.  b-c, Conditioning phase 

choice behavio ur on novel stimuli (Probe Choice trials). b, Improvement in accuracy across 

presentation blocks (grouped in five bins of 8 Probe Choice trials, or 2 presentation blocks, each) 

averaged across sessions (±SEM). *p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.0001, one -sample t-test, 

Bonferroni -corrected. c, Accuracy in the early (presentations 1 -3) and late (presentations 7 -10) 

Probe Choice trials of the Conditioning phase, averaged across sessions (±SEM). Trials were split 

according to attribute. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

fixating novel options even in the absence of any bias towards choosing them (Cavanagh 

et al., 2019) . Here, we report neuronal activity from 156 neurons located in ACC 

(primarily from the dorsal bank of the anterior cingulate sulcus, area 24c) and 160 

neurons located in OFC (primarily from the medial orbital gyrus, area 11/ 13) (Fig. 2a). 

We focus on whether the choice context (novel vs overtrained) impacts value -related 

signals , and how value -related signals emerge during learning. 

Overtraining does not alter ACC value representations, but recruits distinct 

OFC subpopulations 

Presenting choices between the cues learned that day (Novel trials) or between heavily 

experienced cues (OT trials) allowed us to evaluate whether training alters the nature of 

ACC and OFC value representations. Note that for each of the five level s of value, the 

reward probability (or reward magnitude) associated with a Novel or OT stimulus was 

identical; only the amount of experience with that stimulus differed (Fig. 1a) .

We first examined how strongly neurons encoded chosen value in Novel and OT 

trials (GLM -1) . Value signals emerged in ACC and OFC ~200ms post cue -onset and 

showed no significant difference between Novel and OT trials ( coefficient of partial 

determination, CPD; permutation test; Fig. 3a, Supplementary Fig. 1). In both regions, 

selectivity strength increased across trial epochs ( ACC: F(1, 155 ) = 19.87 , p < 0.0001 ,

OFC: F(1, 15 7) = 6.58 , p = 0.0 11 ; repeated -measures ANOVA) , whereas c hoice experience 

had no effect o n value coding , indicating that value explained a comparable fraction of 

firing rate variance across experience levels . Consistent with this, choice experience did 

not produce a systematic change in population firing rate (mean FR ± SEM, averaged 

across neurons and epochs, ACC: 12. 14 ± 1.0 5 on Novel trials and 12.1 4 ± 1.0 4 on OT 

trials, t(155) = -0.0 1, p = 0. 9; OFC: 9. 41 ± 0.74 on Novel trials and 9. 32 ± 0.7 4 on OT 

trials, t(159) = 0. 75 , p = 0. 5). 

To further explore whether value representations were sensitive to choice novelty ,

we examined the cross -correlation of t statistics for chosen value on Novel and OT trials 

(GLM -1) . This revealed a strikingly positive correlation in the ACC population, which 

emerged approximately at the same time as value signals (~200ms post -cues on) and was 

stably maintained for the entire trial duration (cluster -based permutation test ; Fig. 3b), 

suggesting the value representations used in both Novel and OT choices were similar. 

While Novel and OT value coding was also positively correlated in OFC (Fig. 3b), this 

correlation was significantly lower than in ACC (cluster -based permutation tests; 

Supplementary Fig. 2). Thus , while both regions encode d the value of Novel and OT 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint 9

choices equally strongly, ACC neurons used a generalised value code across Novel and OT 

cues when compared to OFC neurons. 

Having found stronger Novel -OT generalisation in ACC than OFC, we next asked 

how this experience -related structure relates to reward attribute. ACC and OFC are 

known to differ in how their value codes generalise across choice attributes , with ACC 

tending to support a more generalised code and OFC more often showing context - and 

attribute -specific coding (Elston & Wallis, 2025; Kennerley et al., 2009) . We therefore 

summarised value coding across the same post -cue choice epoch shown in Fig. 3b, and 

examined chosen value correlations across the four trial types defined by reward attribute 

(magnitude or probability) and experience (Novel or OT). We considered three possible 

organisations of the value code (Fig. 3 c): a ‘fully generalised ’ code, predicting similar 

value coding across all conditions ; an ‘attribute -dependent’ code , predicting shared value 

coding between Novel and OT trials within the same attribute ; or an ‘experience -

dependent’ code , predicting shared value coding between magnitude and probability 

trials within the same level of experience. ACC more closely resembled a fully generalised 

code than OFC . In ACC, chosen value representations showed significant correlations 

both across experience and across attribute, consistent with a common -currency format 

that generalised across both task dimensions (Fig. 3 d; Supplementary Fig. 3). In OFC, by 

contrast, value representations remained more segregated across task dimensions :

correlations remained significantly lower than those in ACC for all comparisons , and 

magnitude -probability correlations within OT trials were not significant, consistent with 

Figure 3.  Choice experience does not alter ACC value representations but recruits 

distinct OFC subpopulations . a , Coefficient of partial determination (CPD, %) for chosen value 

during the Choice phase, split between Novel and OT choice trials, averaged across all ACC (left) and 

OFC (right) neurons. Coloured horizontal lines denote significance within the corresponding trial 

split, determined by permutation testing. b, Cross -correlation matrices reflecting the time -varying 

relationship between value coding (chosen value t statistics) in Novel and OT trials across all ACC 

(left) and OFC (right) neurons. White lines denote significance determined by cluster -based 

permutation testing. c, Template correlation matrices illustrating candidate organizations of the 

chosen value code across reward attribute and choice experience: fully generalized (top), attribute -

dependent (or generalizing over experience, middle), and experience -dependent (o r generalizing over 

attribute, bottom). Conditions are ordered as Novel magnitude, OT magnitude, Novel probability, and 

OT probability. d, Empirical correlation matrices for value coding in ACC (left) and OFC (right). Each 

cell shows the Pearson correlation between neuron -wise chosen value t statistics for the corresponding 

pair of conditions, estimated from firing rates averaged across the 1.5 s following cue onset across all 

neurons within each region. ACC exhibits a more fully generalized value code than OFC, whereas OFC 

shows evidence of an attribute -dependent code specifically during OT trials.  *p<0.05, ** p<0.001, 

*** p<0.0001, Bonferroni -corrected.  e, Proportion of ACC and OFC neurons encoding value only in 

Novel trials, only in OT trials or in both trial types.  *p<0.05, ** p<0.001, *** p<0.0001, Binomial test 

and Chi -squared test .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

attribute -dependent value coding . These findings suggest that ACC generalises value 

coding across both reward attribute and choice experience, whereas OFC retains a more 

structured code consistent with context - and attribute -specificity, though this pattern 

only emerges with experience .

What is the source of OFC’s experience -dependent value code ? Examination of 

value -selective neurons (GLM -1; Fig. 3 e) revealed OFC neurons tended to be selective 

either in Novel or OT trials, rather than both, consistent with a more experience -

dependent code. ACC neurons were in fact more likely to encode value across both trial 

types ( χ² = 18.25 , p < 0.0 001 ; Supplementary Fig. 4). Overall, this pattern is further 

evidence that ACC maintains a more generalised value code across experience, whereas 

OFC relies on more distinct, experience -dependent subpopulations. 

Choice experience is encoded independently of value 

Given the experience -dependent value code evident in OFC, w e next asked whether ACC 

and OFC encoded experience with a choice context beyond its value. Such novelty signals 

could mark a choice context as unfamiliar, supporting the recruitment of attentional 

resources or promoting exploration under uncertainty. We thus tested whether choice 

novelty per se (i.e. independent of value) was encoded in ACC and OFC neurons during 

Novel and OT trials (GLM -1). 

Both regions strongly encoded whether the choice offered was between Novel or 

between OT cues (Fig. 4a; Supplementary Fig. 5), particularly OFC , whose neurons were 

more likely to encode choice novelty than ACC neurons both before and after choice 

(choice: χ2 = 12.26, p = 0.0009, outcome: χ2 = 5.07, p = 0.048, Bonferroni -corrected; Fig. 

4b). Choice experience is thus a salient contextual variable that modulates frontal 

neurons independently of chosen value (Fig. 4c). 

If the choice novelty code is used to provide contextual input to support the 

recruitment of additional attentional resources , this signal ought to precede chosen value 

coding in time. To test this, we cross -correlated novelty and chosen value CPD time 

courses during Novel trials and quantifi ed their temporal asymmetry (see Methods) .

Consistent with th e prediction , choice novelty coding reliably preceded chosen value 

coding, with the cross -correlation peaking at a lag of ~130 ms (Fig. 4d). Across both 

regions, n ovelty information thus emerged before value signals, consistent with choice 

experience providing a contextual scaffold for subsequent value computation. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

Figure 4.  OFC encodes choice novelty independently of value . a , CPD (%) for choice 

novelty during novel and overtrained trials averaged across all ACC and OFC neurons. Colored 

horizontal lines denote significance within the corresponding region, black horizontal line 

denotes significant difference between regions, determin ed by permutation testing. b,

Proportion of ACC and OFC neurons encoding novelty across trial epochs. *p< 0.05, 

*** p<0.001, chi squared test, Bonferroni -corrected; all p<0.0001 for binomial tests. c, Spike 

density function of an example OFC unit showing a difference in activity as a function of choice 

novelty. Solid horizontal line represents significant novelty coding (| t-stat|≥3.1 for >20ms). 

Bottom row: firing rate for the unit in top row averaged 100 -500ms post -cue presentation in 

Novel and OT trials split according to the value of the chosen cue, showing no value -guided 

modulation of activity. d, Cross -correlation between the time courses of the novelty and chosen 

value signals averaged across all ACC and OFC neurons. Values greater than zero indicate 

stronger alignment when novelty coding preceded chosen value coding. Shading denotes SEM, 

black hor izontal line indicates significant lags determined by permutation testing. Inset: mean 

cross -correlation averaged across the significant lags, shown separately for ACC and OFC 

neurons. Error bars denote SEM. * p < 0.05, one -sample t test. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Novel value representations emerge rapidly with learning 

The introduction of novel cues in every session further allowed us to investigate the 

learning dynamics of value associations in ACC and OFC neurons. We first asked how 

rapidly value representations emerge in single neurons , in order to test whether they may 

arise on timescales similar to those observed in typical human neuroimaging 

experiments. We split Conditioning trials into three bins with a sliding window, 

equivalent to cue presentation blocks 1 -4, 4 -7 and 7 -10 of each cue ( n = 40 trials/bin ;

GLM -2; Fig. 1a -c). We focussed on comparison between the cue presentation and the 

secondary reinforcer epoch , as the latter were stimuli associated with the same value as 

the preceding novel cue, but which had been extensively experienced ahead of recordings. 

Value signals emerged post -cue within 4 -7 presentations of the novel stimuli in ACC and 

within 7 -10 presentations in OF C (permutation tests; Fig. 5). Signals arose ~250ms after 

cue presentation in both regions , a timing consistent with current option evaluation 

(Hunt et al., 2018; Kennerley et al., 2011) . Value post -secondary reinforcer and outcome, 

Figure 5. Novel value 

representations 

emerge rapidly with 

learning. a -b, CPD (%) 

for cue value during 

Conditioning trials, 

averaged across all ACC 

(a) and OFC ( b) neurons. 

Trials were split in three 

bins comprising four cue 

presentations each using a 

sliding window (n=40 

trials/bin). Horizontal 

lines denote significance 

determined by 

permutation testing. 

Coloured lines denote 

significance within trial -

split, black horizontal line 

denotes a significant 

difference between 

presentations 1 -4 and 7 -

10. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

on the other hand , was already encoded within the first 1-4 presentations , reflecting the 

fact these stimuli were heavily overtrained . This was consistent across attributes 

(Supplementary Fig. 6). As rapidly as within 4 -7 cue presentations, the activity of frontal 

neurons thus reflected the emergence of value representations associated with novel cues. 

ACC neurons demonstrate RPE -driven learning dynamics 

We next asked how value representations were acquired. A hallmark of reward prediction 

error (RPE) -based learning is the back propagation of value signals from conditioned 

stimuli or rewards, onto earlier stimuli or states that predict the reward (Sutton & Barto, 

1987) . Within single neurons, this may manifest in the firing rate initially correlating with 

value only after presentation of the overlearned reward -predicting stimuli; with some 

experience of the association of the novel cue with reward, the value signal should then 

emerge at the presentation of the newly learned cue ( Fig. 6a). We explored whether frontal 

neurons exhibited signature s of RPE -based learning by examining Conditioning trials, 

where precise information about the value associated with a novel cue could be extracted 

following presentation of the secondary reinforcer. To test whether the emergent value 

representations at cue resembled those at secondary reinforcer , we compared value 

coding at cue during presentations 7 -10 (‘Late’) to value coding at secondary reinforcer 

during presentations 1 -4 (‘ Early’ ; GLM -2). Cross -correlating Late value t statistics at cue 

to Early value t statistics at secondary reinforcer revealed a positive correlation between 

Late cue and Early secondary reinforcer value coding in both ACC and OFC (permutation 

tests, Fig. 6b). This indicated that, as learning progressed, value coding at the newly -

learned cue came to reflect the pattern previously observed at the secondary reinforcer .

As predicted , t he opposite relationship – Early value coding at cue to Late value coding at 

secondary reinforcer – showed no correlation , likely due to the absence of cue -value 

coding in early trials .

A second feature of RPE -based learning is that , upon learning to associate value 

with a novel cue, neurons’ responses to reward itself , or to already known reward -

predicting stimul i, decrease , since reward is now entirely predicted by the preceding novel 

cue (Fig. 6a). This is widely described in dopaminergic neurons , but is yet to be 

demonstrated in frontal neurons . Although value coding at the secondary reinforcer 

remained evident across the ACC population in later presentations (Fig. 5), we next asked 

whether it diminished specifically in neurons that acquired cue -value representations. We 

thus tested whether neurons that acquired value representations at cue also decrease d

value responses associated with the secondary reinforcer (GLM -2). We found that ACC 

neurons that acquired value representations at cue within 4 -10 presentations (‘cue -value 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint 15 

learners’ , n = 21 ; t(20) = 20.15 , p < 0.0001 , one -sample t-test on absolute t statistic for 

cue value after cue presentation ) showed a significant decrease in value coding in the 

secondary reinforcer epoch between the Early and the Late presentations (difference 

between value regression coefficients was significantly different from 0 ; t(20) = -3.25, p =

0.004 , one -sample t-test ; Fig. 6c), whereas OFC cue -value learners did not (n = 21; t(20) 

= -0.53, p = 0.6 , one -sample t-test on difference between value regression coefficients at 

cue and at secondary reinforcer; t(20) = 20. 23 , p < 0.0001, one -sample t-test on absolute 

t statistic for cue value after cue presentation ). To visualise the time course of this shift in 

value coding from secondary reinforcer to cue, we grouped Conditioning trials in smaller 

bins , comprising two presentation blocks each (n = 20 trials/bin) , and estimated value 

regression coefficients at both cue and secondary reinforcer ( GLM -2; Fig. 6d,e ). After 4 

presentations, cue -value learners in ACC displayed no significant value responses at 

secondary reinforcer ( value regression coefficients not significantly different from 0; t(20) 

= 4. 80 , p = 0. 0001 at pres entation 1-2; t(20) = 2.40 , p = 0. 03 at pres entation 3-4; p > 0.05 

at later presentations ). This is coherent with RPE -based learning in ACC , since the value 

of the secondary reinforcer is now entirely predicted by the newly learned cue. 

Figure 6.  ACC neurons demonstrate RPE -driven learning dynamics. a , Example 

ACC single unit showing value -related activity following the secondary reinforcer in the early 

Conditioning trials (top, cue presentations 1 -4); value -related activity then emerges during the 

cue -period in late Conditioning trials (bottom, cue prese ntations 7 -10). Solid horizontal line 

represents significant  value coding (| t stat|≥3.1 for 20ms). b, Diagonal of cross -correlation 

matrices reflecting the time -varying relationship between value coding in the cue presentation 

epoch and value coding in the secondary reinforcer and outcome epoch in Conditioning trials 

of the Conditioning phase, averaged acro ss all ACC (top) and OFC (bottom) neurons. Solid 

lines represent the relationship of interest (Late value coding at cue to Early value coding at 

secondary reinforcer), whereas dashed lines represent the corresponding control relationship 

(i.e. the reverse relationship). Coloured horizontal lines denote significance within 

corresponding correlation, determined by cluster -based permutation testing. c-g, Analyses 

were restricted to neurons that significantly encoded value during the cue presentation epoch 

during presentation blocks 4 -10 in Conditioning trials of the Conditioning phase (‘cue -value 

learners’). c, Difference in value regression coefficients between Early coding and Late coding 

during the secondary reinforcer epoch of Conditioning trials of the Conditioning phase. 

Regression coefficients were estimated on firing rate averaged 100 -500ms after presentat ion 

of the secondary reinforcer. ** p<0.001, one -sample t-test. d-e, Value regression coefficients 

estimated on firing rate averaged 100 -500ms after presentation of the cue (green) and of the 

secondary reinforcer (blue line) (±SEM) in Conditioning trials of the Conditioning phase in 

ACC (d) and OFC (e) cue -value learners. Tr ials were grouped in five bins comprising two 

presentation blocks each to visualize the evolution of the signal over time. *** p<0.0001, 

** p<0.001, t -test vs 0. f-g, Chosen value regression coefficients estimated on the firing rates 

during the cues presentation (i.e. choice) epoch and outcome epoch in probability trials of the 

Choice phase in ACC (f) and OFC (g) cue -value learners defined during the Conditioning phase. 

Solid horizontal lines denote significance within the corresponding epoch, determined by 

cluster -based permutation testing. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Finally, RPE theory predicts violations in the expectation of reward will be encoded 

after receipt (or omission ) of reward . Encoding of discrepanc ies between expected and 

experienced reward may be demonstrated in neuronal activity by value being represented 

with opposite signs at choice and outcome . Indeed, the ACC cue -value learners defined 

during the Conditioning phase displayed this hallmark of RPE -coding during probability 

trials of the Choice phase , whereas OFC cue -value learners did not (Fig. 6f,g ; GLM -2 and 

GLM -3). Altogether, these results suggest ACC and OFC neurons rapidly develop novel 

value representations through their existing value coding schemes , a dynamic which, i n

ACC neurons, follows the well -established tenets of RPE -based learning. 

Discussion 

Value -guided learning and decision -making have been well -characterised in the neurons 

of overtrained non -human primates , and in human neuroimaging studies with often 

naïve participants. Yet little is known about the time course in which individual frontal 

neurons develop value representations , or whether frontal representations for 

overtrained and newly -valued stimuli are distinct or overlapping . We have demonstrated 

that value representations emerge d in ACC and OFC neurons as rapidly as within 4-7

presentations of novel reward -predicting cues. Novel value signals resemble d existing 

value representations associated with known cues , particularly strongly within ACC . I n

ACC neurons, their emergence wa s paralleled by a decrease in value responses associated 

with well -know n cues , as predicted by RPE -learning theory and described in dopamine 

neurons . We showed that ACC neuro ns used a common value code when faced with 

choices between novel or between well -learned cues , whereas choice experience induced 

the recruitment of distinct neuronal subpopulations in OFC . Frontal neurons , particularly 

within OFC, further signalled choice novelty independently of value, with novelty signals 

emerging before chosen value representations .

Together, these findings bear directly on a central assumption in the decision -making 

field: that the single -neuron responses described in overtrained non -human primates 

provide a neural substrate for the rapidly arising value signals observed in human 

neu roimaging . Our study provides some evidence to bolster this assumptio n. Firstly, we 

showed val ue -related responses may emerge as rapidly as within 4-7 presentations of a 

novel cue . This timescale is congruent with that of a human participant undergoing a 

quick practice block of a task before heading into the scanner . One important parallel is 

that, in human studies, linguistic instructions often establish the relevant task set before 

learning begins (Castro -Rodrigues et al., 2022) . In our task, the subjects’ extensive 

experience with the broader conditioning and choice structure may provide an analogous 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

scaffold or state space, allowing value acquisition for new cues to proceed particularly 

rapidly. Consistent with this, rapid acquisition of novel cue -rule associations has 

previously been observed in dorsolateral PFC neurons when animals are well -trained on 

the task structure (Cromer et al., 2011) , and dopamine neurons can similarly acquire 

value responses to new stimuli via secondary reinforcers over the course of repeated 

exposures (Hollerman & Schultz, 1998) . This may distinguish rapid learning within a 

familiar task structure from settings in which animals must learn the task itself from 

scratch. 

Secondly, we showed that value coding in ACC neurons was not altered as a 

function of whether the choice option presented had been experienced thousands of times 

before , or for the first time on that same day. In fact , ACC neurons were more likely to 

encode value during both choice types, rather than only during one , and were more likely 

to do so than OFC neurons. One possible explanation of ACC’s generalised value code 

across task -related variables , particularly at outcome, may be to consider the region’s 

functional proximity to the process of action selection (Cai & Padoa -Schioppa, 2021; 

Kennerley et al., 2006; Rushworth et al., 2011) . ACC neurons are at the interface of 

reward processing and motor output (Klein -Flugge et al., 2022; Van Hoesen et al., 1993) 

and encode both reward and motor contingenc ies (Chen et al., 2024; Hayden & Platt, 

2010) , often doing so in a ‘common currency’ across different attributes (e.g. Kennerley 

et al ., 2011) . Abstracting information regarding an option’s value from contextual 

variables irrelevant for immediate choice (namely, level of training) may thus provide a 

more sensible substrate for action selection. 

It should be noted that the value coding in ACC that generalises from novel to 

overtrained stimuli is typically chosen value coding, rather than action value coding. 

While chosen value coding has sometimes been posited as a ‘post -decision’ variable 

(Blanchard & Hayden, 2014) , other interpretations suggest it is better thought of as 

reflecting the speed at which a decision process unfolds over time (Hunt et al., 2015) .

Within ACC, this dynamical process may be the ultimate decision itself (over which option 

to choose), or it may instead reflect internal decisions over where next to allocate 

attention or sample information (Banaie Boroujeni & Womelsdorf, 2023; Butler et al., in 

press ; Kaanders et al., 2021) .

OFC responses, on the other hand, present a case of modulation of PFC 

computations that may be concealed by standard non -human primate training protocols .

For instance, OFC neurons were significantly less likely to encode value in a general 

fashion across different levels of experience, when compared to ACC. This differential 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

neuronal recruitment may be difficult to detect by human neuroimaging methods such as 

fMRI . Furthermore, we found that OFC neurons were mo re likely to be selective for value 

during novel than overtrained choice . This is coherent with the preferential recruitment 

of the human medial frontal cortex during information sampling and consideration of 

novel experiences (Barron et al., 2013; Kaanders et al., 2021) .

It should be noted that, while our subjects learned novel cues every session, they 

had already been trained on the task structure . This is unlike human participants, who 

are usually tasked with learning the task structure , as well as the option values , only 

shortly before entering the scanner. It will be interesting for future work to test the 

influence of a strong prior for task structure on the emergence of novel value 

representations .

These experience -dependent differences in OFC raise the possibility that novelty 

itself acts as a contextual signal for value computation . Indeed, w e found that the training 

level on a given option , i.e. its novelty per se , modulated frontal activity independently of 

value, particularly in OFC. Orthogonality to value is a common feature of OFC coding for 

other task -related variables, such as informativeness (Blanchard et al., 2015; Bussell et 

al., 2024) , stimulus identity (Klein -Flugge et al., 2013) , choice risk (O'Neill & Schultz, 

2010) or social category (Barat et al., 2018) , and p refrontal n ovelty detection -related 

responses are similarly un correlated with reward -related activity (Zhang et al., 2022) . Our 

temporal analysis further showed that novelty signals preceded chosen -value signals 

across frontal regions, suggesting that novelty may provide an early contextual signal that 

shapes subsequent value computation. This interpretation fits with accounts emphasizing 

the role of prefrontal cortex, and OFC in particular, in representing task -state structure 

(Boorman et al., 2021; Schuck et al., 2016; Veselic, Gutierrez, et al., 2025; Veselic, Muller, 

et al., 2025; Wilson et al., 2014) . Elston and Wallis (2025) showed that when identical 

cues carried different values across task states, OFC recruited distinct neuronal 

subpopulations , revealing context -dependent coding. Here , novelty may similarly mark 

the current choice context (“new” vs “well -learned”), engaging partially separable 

subpopulations to encode value conditional on that context. Although novelty was not 

strictly relevant for correct choice once values were learned, it may still index uncertainty 

about cue -outcome mappings or value estimates, thereby supporting the allocation of 

attention and information gathering when uncertainty is high (Hunt et al., 2018) .

Beyond showing that novelty contextualises frontal value coding, our results also 

speak to the mechanism by which these representations are acquired. We report that 

RPE -based learning in primate ACC neurons follows the same pattern as that observed in 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

dopaminergic RPE neurons. Whereas RPE -coding during learning of stimuli and action 

values has been previously shown in ACC neurons (Kennerley et al., 2011; Matsumoto, 

Matsumoto, et al., 2007; Muller et al., 2024; Seo & Lee, 2007) , here we specifically 

characterise cue -value learning as a temporal shift in value responses from known to 

newly learned reward -predicting cues (Amo et al., 2022; Sutton, 1988) . We further 

showed that ACC neurons can acquire novel value representations as rapidly as within 4 -

7 trials, a timescale that may enable within -session – or, in fact, within -block –

behavioural adaptation (Cole et al., 2024) . This aligns with broader primate accounts of 

ACC integrating learning signals across timescales and uncertainty (Cavanagh et al., 

2016; Kennerley et al., 2011; Monosov et al., 2020) , and with recent evidence that ACC 

value signals are not purely reward codes , but may reflect structural task features 

(Miranda et al., 2026) . Coupled with the notion that ACC is a primary cortical recipient of 

dopaminergic input (Williams & Goldman -Rakic, 1998) , such rapid RPE -like learning 

may allow for our findings to be interpreted through the lens of meta -reinforcement 

learning, or Meta -RL (Wang et al., 2018) . Meta -RL implements a slow, dopamine -driven 

RL algorithm to change the weights in a recurrent neural network which learns to 

implement a second, fast, PFC -based RL algorithm that changes trial -to -trial in the 

activation of the units. Within the context of our task, this may translate to dopaminergic 

input acting over several sessions to learn the structure of the task (i.e. “learning novel 

cues during conditioning will maximise reward during choice”), while PFC learning 

occurs rapidly within -session to est ablish cue -value associations and support behavioural 

adaptation (Hattori et al., 2023) . While our study provides evidence in support of PFC’s 

rapid learning timescale, future work ought to parse the relative dopaminergic and 

cortical contributions to RPE -based learning by selectively interfering with the different 

circuit components. Furthermore, ACC may support richer forms of RPE -based learning 

than a single mean value update: recent work suggests that ACC neurons differ in their 

relative sensitivity to positive and negative prediction errors, producing a spectrum of 

value estimates that can collectively encode the reward distribution (Muller et al., 2024) .

Investigating how reward distributions are rapidly learned will be an interesting avenue 

for future research. 

In summary, our findings show that frontal value signals can emerge within only a 

few experiences with a novel option to support newly encountered choice s. ACC exhibited 

a generali sed value code with RPE -like learning dynamics, whereas OFC ’s neural code 

was more sensitive to novelty and choice context . These results support the translational 

relevance of primate single -neuron studies of value -guided behaviour , and reveal regional 

differences that may be difficult to detect with neuroimaging alone. They further highlight 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

the need for closer alignment of behavioural paradigms across species to build a more 

unified account of FC contributions to learning and decision -making. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank Sean Cavanagh and Viktor Kewenig for earlier contributions. 

Funding 

E.G., J.L.B., T.H.M. and S.W.K. were supported by Wellcome Trust Investigator Awards 

(096689/Z/11/Z, 220296/Z/20/Z). E.G. was supported by Medical Research Council 

Doctoral Training Partnership (MR/N013867/1) . S.V. was supported by Leverhulme 

award (DS -2017 -026 ). W.M.N.M. was supported by funding from the Astor Foundation, 

Rosetrees Trust and Middlesex Hospital Medical School General Charitable Trust. L.T.H. 

was supported by a Henry Wellcome Fellowship (098830/Z/12/Z) and Henry Dale 

Fellowship (208789/Z/17/Z) fro m the Wellcome Trust. S.W.K. and L.T.H. are supported 

by BBSRC Strategic Longer and Larger Grant (BB/W003392/1). 

Author contributions 

Conceptualization: L.T.H., W.M.N.M., S .W.K. Methodology: L.T.H., W.M.N.M., S .W.K. 

Investigation: L.T.H., W.M.N.M., S .W.K. , E.G., T.H.M., J.L.B., S.V. Visualization: E.G. 

Funding acquisition: S.W.K. Project administration: S .W.K. Supervision: S.V., S.W.K. 

Writing – original draft: E.G. Writing – review & editing: T.H.M., J.L.B., L.T.H., S.V., 

S.W.K. 

Competing interests 

Authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Data and materials availability 

All data and code to reproduce figures will be available at 

https://github.com/elenagutierr/learning_paper  upon publication .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Methods 

Subjects. Two adult male rhesus macaques (M. mulatta ), M and F, were used as subjects 

in the study. They weighed 7 -10 kg at the time of neuronal data collection and were ~4 

years old at the start of the experiment. Their daily fluid intake was regulated to maintain 

subject motivation. All experimental procedures were approved by the UCL Local Ethical 

Procedures Committ ee and the UK Home Office (PPL Number 70/7231) and carried out 

in accordance with the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act. 

Behavioural protocol. The details of the experimental set up have been described 

previously (Hunt et al., 2018) . The task was delivered through the MATLAB -based 

toolbox MonkeyLogic (http://www.monkeylogic.net/, Brown University) (Asaad &

Eskandar, 2008a, 2008b; Asaad et al., 2013) . Eye position was monitored using an 

infrared camera (ISCAN ETL -200) sampled at 240 Hz. Subject responses during the task 

were made with a voltage -gating joystick (APEM). Joystick and eye positions were relayed 

to MonkeyLogic for use online during the tas k, and were also recorded by MonkeyLogic 

at 1,000 Hz for offline analysis. Juice was delivered to a spout placed to the subjects’ lips 

through a peristaltic pump (ISMATEC IPC). 

Task . The details of the task have been described previously (Cavanagh et al., 2019) .

During each session, subjects underwent a short conditioning procedure (Conditioning 

phase) and then performed a value -based decision -making task (Choice phase). During 

the Conditioning phase they were taught the value of ten Novel cues, five associated with 

receiving different quantities of reward (magnitude cues, predicting 0.14g, 0.33g, 0.51g, 

0.71g or 0.90g of juice) and five associated with different probabilities of receiving a fixed 

amount of reward (probability cues, predicting 10%, 30%, 50%, 70% or 90% probability 

of 0.51g of juice). The conditioning procedure consisted of twenty blocks of one -

alternative ‘forced choice’ trials ( Conditioning trials), alternating between magnitude and 

probability cues, each followed by two binary choice trials between two cues of the 

attribute at hand. Within a single block, each of the value levels of the given attribute was 

presented once. Ten blo cks were completed for each attribute. 

The Conditioning phase was followed by a Choice phase, where subjects were 

presented two -alternative choices. Choice options included the Novel cues learned that 

day during the Conditioning Phase, as well as ten Overtrained (OT) cues (five predicting 

magnitude of reward and five predicting probability of reward). These were stimuli which 

the subjects had been heavily exposed to in training sessions prior to data collection (M: 

~1500, F: ~3000 exposures to the stimulus set). The s ame OT stimulus set was used for 

every recording session, whereas Novel cues were exclusively used for one session. Choice 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

trials comprised choices between two OT cues (OT trials), two Novel cues (Novel trials) 

or one cue from each stimulus set (Mixed trials). Choices were only offered within 

attribute and never between cues of equal value. Choice accuracy was therefore defined 

as selection of the higher -value cue. All trial types were pseudo -randomly interleaved. 

All trials were initiated by returning the joystick to centre position. During a 

Conditioning trial, subjects were first required to fixate a central red fixation point (size: 

0.5 × 0.5 visual degrees) amid a white background for 500 ms (fixation radius: 3 visual 

degrees). If central fixation was not acquired within a 10s window a short ‘timeout’ period 

was given before the trial restarted. Upon successful fixation, the fixation poin t

disappeared and a single iso -luminant picture cue (100 x 100 pixels) was presented 6.5 

visual degrees to the left or the right of the centre of screen. Choice was required through 

leftward or rightward joystick movement within a 5s window, otherwise the trial was 

aborted. Upon choice of the cue, this was highlighted by drawing a grey square around it 

for 500ms. A grey square thereby replaced the cue for a further 500ms. This was followed 

by presentation for 500 ms of a secondary reinforcer, which was a co loured bar whose 

height indicated the value associated with the chosen stimulus. A further 500ms pre -

feedback period was then followed by the reward epoch, which included reward delivery 

via a juice pump. 

During Choice trials, following central fixation, two cues appeared to the right and 

the left of the screen. Subjects were free to saccade anywhere on or off the screen and 

choose one of the cues through joystick movement. Once a response was acquired, the 

chosen cue was highlighted by drawing a grey square around it for a 500ms pre -feedback 

period. The unchosen cue thereby disappeared from the screen, and the reward epoch 

(including juice delivery) was initiated. 

After completion of the present task on ‘Day 1’, subjects went on to perform a 

different decision -making task on the subsequent three sessions (‘Day 2 -4’) – described 

by Hunt et al. (2018) – which used the Novel cues learned on Day 1. The session schedule 

thereby restarted with a new Day 1 session. Here we only report on data collected on Day 

1 sessions. 

Neuronal recordings. Details of our methods for neurophysiological recordings were 

reported elsewhere (Hunt et al., 2018) . Here we report on data recorded from two target 

regions: ACC and OFC. We defined ACC as the entire dorsal bank of the anterior cingulate 

sulcus from AP 27 -37 mm. All neurons lateral to the medial orbital sulcus and medial to 

the lateral orbital sulcus we re considered OFC. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Data analysis. 

Behavioural analysis. Behavioural data for the Choice phase have been reported 

previously (Cavanagh et al., 2019) . All analyses collapsed trials across attributes, unless 

otherwise specified. We assessed increase in choice accuracy during the Conditioning 

phase, as proxy for learning of the Novel cues, by testing whether accuracy was 

significantly above chance in the Conditioning Phase choice trials (pooled across 

attributes) within bins of two blocks/bin. 

Neuronal analyses. For all neuronal analyses, firing rates were smoothed with a 

Gaussian smoothing window of 250ms (50ms standard deviation) and normalised. 

Analyses using a boxcar method for smoothing (averaging firing rates within a sliding 

200ms window in 10ms steps) pr oduced comparable results. 

General linear models. We used three different GLMs, detailed in Table 1. GLM -1

included Novel and OT trials of the Choice phase and examined how neurons’ selectivity 

to value was influenced by the level of training on a set of cues (Fig. 3). The same GLM 

was also used to test whether neurons were selective to the novelty of a choice, 

independently of the value of the cues pres ented (Fig. 4). GLM -2 modelled the 

relationship between the neurons’ firing rate and the value of the cues presented (Fig. 5-

6). We fit the same GLM to three splits of the conditioning trials across the Conditioning 

Phase, which included cue presentation blocks 1 -4, 4 -7 and 7 -10 respectively ( n=40 

trials/bin) (Fig. 5, 6a-b). We also separately fit GLM -2 to Conditioning trials from cue 

presentation blocks 4 -10 in order to define neurons that acquired cue -related value 

selectivity during the Conditioning phase ( ‘cue -value learners’, Fig. 6c-e). In the same 

neurons, w e also test ed the presence of opponent coding for value during the Choice phase 

by fitting GLM -2 to firing rates during the cue presentation epoch, and GLM -3 to firing 

rates during the outcome epoch (Fig. 6f,g ; see Reward prediction error -coding below for 

details ). For GLM -3, interaction terms were orthogonalised with respect to their lower -

order terms to remove shared variance ; that is, probability of reward on rewarded and 

unrewarded trials were orthogonalised relative to categorical reward delivery .

GLM -1

Trials included 

Choice phase, Novel and OT trials . Computed separately on Magnitude and Probability 

trials for Fig. 3 c-d.

Response variable 

Normalised firing rate 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

Cross -correlation of parameter estimates from GLMs (Fig. 3 b,d , Fig. 6b). After the 

models above were estimated for each neuron, we correlated the t statistics associated 

with parameter estimates for different regressors across neurons. In Fig. 3 b and Fig. 6b, 

parameter estimates were taken from 50ms pre -stimulus presentation (i.e. presentation 

of the cue(s) or of secondary reinforcer) or event (i.e. response in the choice epoch or 

reward delivery in the outcome epoch) to 500ms post -stimulus presentation or e vent, and 

Regressor  Range 

Choice novelty  -0.5 or 0.5 

Chosen value on Novel trials  -2 to 2, or 0 if OT trial 

Chosen value on OT trials  -2 to 2, or 0 if Novel trial 

Unchosen value on Novel trials  -2 to 2, or 0 if OT trial 

Unchosen value on OT trials  -2 to 2, or 0 if Novel trial 

Left -Right side of chosen cue  0 or 1 

GLM -2

Trials included 

Conditioning phase, Conditioning trials; Choice phase, Probability trials. 

Response variable 

Normalised firing rate 

Regressor  Range 

Cue value  -2 to 2 

Left -Right cue position  0 or 1 

GLM -3

Trials included 

Choice phase, Probability trials. 

Response variable 

Normalised firing rate 

Regressor  Range 

Rewarded trial  0 or 1 

Reward probability on rewarded trials  -2 to 2, or 0 if unrewarded trial 

Reward probability on unrewarded trials  -2 to 2, or 0 if rewarded trial 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

correlations were repeated on all possible combinations of timepoints to produce a cross -

correlation matrix. In the case of Fig. 6b, only the diagonal of the cross -correlation matrix 

was included for further analysis for clarity purposes. In Fig. 3 d, firing rates were 

averaged in the 1.5 s following cue onset (i.e. the same post -cue choice epoch shown in 

Fig. 3b ), and correlations were estimated on the resulting parameter estimates .

Additionally, parameters were estimated separately between attributes by fitting GLM -1

separately to firing rate on Magnitude and Probability trials. 

In Fig. 3, the t statistics for the chosen value on Novel trials and chosen value on 

OT trials regressors from GLM -1 were correlated to assess similarity between neural 

representations associated with differing levels of training. 

In Fig. 6, the t statistics for the cue value regressor from GLM -2 were used to assess 

similarity between emerging neuronal representations during the cue presentation epoch 

and existing representations during the secondary reinforcer presentation epoch. We 

correlated the value t statistics obtained by fitting GLM -2 to firing rates from trials within 

presentation blocks 7 -10 during the cue presentation epoch to the t statistics obtained by 

fitting GLM -2 to firing rates from trials within blocks 1 -4 during the secondary reinforcer 

epoch. We further compared the data to the opposite correlation as a control – between t

statistics obtained by fitting GLM -2 to firing rates from trials within presentation blocks 

1-4 during the cue presentation epoch to the t statistics obtained by fitting GLM -2 to firing 

rates from trials within blocks 7-10 during the secondary reinforcer epoch. This 

procedure allowed us to ascertain that the positive correlation in the data was only present 

between the hypothesised presentation blocks. 

Statistical inference on cross -correlation of parameter estimates (Fig. 3 b, Fig. 6b). We 

used a cluster -based permutation test approach to assess whether high/low correlation 

coefficients were significantly greater than expected by chance (Hunt et al., 2018) . For 

Fig. 3 b and 6b, we permuted the regressors of GLM -1 and GLM -2 (1,000 permutations). 

A null distribution of correlation coefficients was obtained by storing the 97.5 th percentile 

at each timepoint of the permuted data. For each permutation, we identified clusters that 

exceeded the null distribution and the size of the largest cluster was stored. We used the 

97.5 th percentile of this distribution as a threshold for deeming whether the clusters in 

the data exceeding the null distribution were significant. In Fig. 6b, a significant difference 

between the positive correlation in the data and the control was also assessed through the 

same procedure, but where the null distribution was obtained by permuting the labels of 

the presentation blocks (i.e. 1 -4 and 7 -10) once the parameters had been estimated and 

correlated. In Fig. 3 b, we also tested a significant difference in correlation coefficients 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

between ACC and OFC neurons by permuting the labels of the regions once parameters 

were estimated ( Supplementary Fig. 2). 

Estimating temporal structure of choice novelty and chosen value codes (Fig. 4d). To 

assess whether the choice novelty code temporally preceded the chosen value code, we 

quantified the lagged relationship between choice novelty and chosen value CPD 

estimates. For each neuron, choice novelty and chosen value CPD time courses during 

Novel trials (-500ms to +1s from choice onset) were extracted using GLM -1 and z -scored 

across time. This was done to prevent differences in overall CPD magnitude across 

neurons from dominating cross -correlation estimates. We then computed the normalized 

cross -correlation between the two CPD time courses at lags up to 1 500 ms in both 

temporal directions. This produced, for each neuron, a cross -correlation function 

describing the similarity between novelty and chosen value coding at different temporal 

offsets. 

Because CPD estimates are unsigned, this analysis tests whether the strength of 

novelty coding and chosen value coding covaried across time, rather than whether the two 

variables were encoded with the same sign. We therefore quantified temporal asymmetry 

by comparing cross -correlations at matched positive and negative lags. Positive forward -

backward asymmetry values indicate stronger alignment when the choice novelty code 

precedes the chosen value code, whereas negative values indicate stronger alignment 

when chosen value coding precedes choice novelty coding. 

Statistical significance was assessed with a permutation test in which novelty CPD 

time courses were randomly reassigned across neurons relative to chosen value CPD time 

courses. For each of 500 permutations, we recomputed the forward -backward asymmetry 

and averaged it across neurons. The significance threshold was defined as the maximum, 

across lags, of the 95th percentile of this null distribution, thereby correcting for multiple 

lag comparisons. Observed lags exceeding this threshold were considered significant. 

Reward prediction error -coding (Fig. 6c-g). We restricted these analyses to neurons 

selective for value during conditioning trials within the cue presentation blocks 4 -10 of 

the Conditioning phase (‘cue -value learners’). Our approach to assess the presence of 

RPE -coding at the population level was two -fold. In Fig. 6c, we fit GLM -2 to firing rates 

from conditioning trials within blocks 1 -4 and 7 -10, averaged 100 -500ms after secondary 

reinforcer presentation, and tested whether the difference between value regression 

coefficients averaged across the population was significantly above or below zero ( one -

sample t-test , p < 0.05). In Fig. 6f,g, we fit GLM -3 to firing rates from probability trials of 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

the Choice phase during the outcome epoch. In order to determine whether the value 

regression coefficients averaged across the population were greater/lower than expected 

by chance, we used the same cluster -based permutation test described above, where the 

null distribution was obtained by permuting the regressors. To account for the prefrontal 

and cingulate heterogeneity of positive and negative value coders, the sign of the value 

regression coefficient of interest was flipped for neurons that displayed a negative value 

regression coefficient (GLM -2) in a control epoch. In Fig. 6c, control value regression 

coefficients were determined during the cue presentation epoch of conditioning trials of 

the Conditioning phase. In Fig. 6f,g, control value regression coefficients were determined 

during the cue presentation epoch of probability trials of the Choice phase. 

Neuronal selectivity (Fig. 3 e, 4b, 6c-g). Neuronal selectivity was quantified by fitting a 

GLM to each neuron’s firing rate averaged over the analysis window of interest. For whole -

trial analyses (Figs. 3 -4), this was the full 1.5s period following cue onset. For event -

specific analyses (Fig. 6), firing rates were averaged in 100 -500 ms windows following cue 

onset or secondary reinforcer presentation. A neuron was considered selective for a given 

parameter at p < 0.05 for the corresponding parameter estimate. Binomial tests with a 

false positive rate of p < 0.05 were used to determine whether a region comprised a 

significant proportion of neurons selective for a given parameter (or a false positive rate 

of p < 0.0025 to determine selectivity for two parameters). When testing if a region 

comprised a significant proportion of neurons selective for a given parameter at two 

different epochs, the false positive rate was determined within -region by computing false 

positive rates using permuted data. Proportions of selective neurons were compared using 

a chi -squared test. 

For visualisation purposes (Fig. 4c and Fig. 6a) we also estimated neuronal 

selectivity over time. To do this, we fit a GLM to each neuron’s firing rate at each time -

point. We defined significant selectivity at a given timepoint as an absolute t statistic≥3.1 

for 20 consecutive time -points (Kennerley et al., 2011) . This criterion produced 

acceptable type I (false positive) error levels when examining the proportion of neurons 

reaching criterion during the fixation epoch (500ms window pre -cue presentation), with 

less than 2% neurons crossing the criterion by chance. 

CPD analysis and statistical inference (Fig. 3a, Fig. 4a, Fig. 5) . The contribution of the 

regressors in the three GLMs to explaining variance in neurons’ firing rates was assessed 

by calculating the CPD for each regressor over time, which is defined for explanatory 

variable Xi as follows: 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

𝐶𝑃𝐷 (𝑋 𝑖 ) = 𝑆𝑆𝐸 (𝑋 𝑖 ) − 𝑆𝑆𝐸 (𝑋 −𝑖 , 𝑋 𝑖 )

𝑆𝑆𝐸 (𝑋 −𝑖 )

where  𝑆𝑆𝐸 (𝑋 ) refers to the sum of squared errors in a general linear model (GLM) that 

includes a set of EVs X, and  𝑋 −𝑖  is a set of all the EVs included in the full model except for 

𝑋 𝑖  (Cai et al., 2011; Kennerley et al., 2011) . CPD was assessed to be higher than expected 

by chance through the same permutation test procedure described above. When 

determining statistical significance within a given CPD trace, for each of 1,000 

permutations, the GLMs’ parameters were permuted when estimating CPD. A null 

distribution of population CPDs was obtained by storing the 95 th percentile at each 

timepoint of the permuted data across neurons. For each permutation, the maximum 

length of consecutive timepoints exceeding the null distribution was stored. We used the 

95 th percentile of this distribution as a threshold for deeming whether the cluster sizes in 

the data were significant. To determine a significant difference between different CPD 

traces, the null distribution was obtained by permuting the labels of the data o nce the 

parameters had been estimated: in Fig. 3a, it was the Novel trials or OT trials label; in Fig. 

4a it was the label of the region (ACC or OFC); in Fig. 5, this was the presentation block 

1-4 or 7 -10 label. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

References 

Amiez, C., Joseph, J. P., & Procyk, E. (2006). Reward encoding in the monkey anterior cingulate cortex. 

Cerebral Cortex , 16 (7), 1040 -1055.  https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhj046 

Amo, R., Matias, S., Yamanaka, A., Tanaka, K. F., Uchida, N., & Watabe -Uchida, M. (2022). A gradual 

temporal shift of dopamine responses mirrors the progression of temporal difference error in 

machine learning. Nature Neuroscience , 25 (8), 1082 -1092.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -022 -

01109 -2

Asaad, W. F., & Eskandar, E. N. (2008a). Achieving behavioral control with millisecond resolution in a 

high -level programming environment. Journal of Neuroscience Methods , 173 (2), 235 -240. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.06.003 

Asaad, W. F., & Eskandar, E. N. (2008b). A flexible software tool for temporally -precise behavioral control 

in Matlab. Journal of Neuroscience Methods , 174 (2), 245 -258. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.07.014 

Asaad, W. F., Rainer, G., & Miller, E. K. (1998). Neural activity in the primate prefrontal cortex during 

associative learning. Neuron , 21 (6), 1399 -1407.  https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896 -6273(00)80658 -3

Asaad, W. F., Santhanam, N., McClellan, S., & Freedman, D. J. (2013). High -performance execution of 

psychophysical tasks with complex visual stimuli in MATLAB. Journal of Neurophysiology , 109 (1), 

249 -260.  https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00527.2012 

Averbeck, B. B., Lehman, J., Jacobson, M., & Haber, S. N. (2014). Estimates of projection overlap and 

zones of convergence within frontal -striatal circuits. Journal of Neuroscience , 34 (29), 9497 -9505. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/Jneurosci.5806 -12.2014 

Ballesta, S., Shi, W., Conen, K. E., & Padoa -Schioppa, C. (2020). Values encoded in orbitofrontal cortex are 

causally related to economic choices. Nature , 588 (7838), 450 -453. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -020 -2880 -x

Banaie Boroujeni, K., & Womelsdorf, T. (2023). Routing states transition during oscillatory bursts and 

attentional selection. Neuron , 111 (18), 2929 -2944. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2023.06.012 

Barat, E., Wirth, S., & Duhamel, J. R. (2018). Face cells in orbitofrontal cortex represent social categories. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 115 (47), 

E11158 -E11167.  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1806165115 

Barron, H. C., Dolan, R. J., & Behrens, T. E. J. (2013). Online evaluation of novel choices by simultaneous 

representation of multiple memories. Nature Neuroscience , 16 (10), 1492 -1498. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3515 

Blanchard, T. C., & Hayden, B. Y. (2014). Neurons in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex signal postdecisional 

variables in a foraging task. Journal of Neuroscience , 34 (2), 646 -655. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3151 -13.2014 

Blanchard, T. C., Hayden, B. Y., & Bromberg -Martin, E. S. (2015). Orbitofrontal cortex uses distinct codes 

for different choice attributes in decisions motivated by curiosity. Neuron , 85 (3), 602 -614. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.050 

Bongioanni, A., Folloni, D., Verhagen, L., Sallet, J., Klein -Flugge, M. C., & Rushworth, M. F. S. (2021). 

Activation and disruption of a neural mechanism for novel choice in monkeys. Nature , 591 , 270 -

274.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -020 -03115 -5

Boorman, E. D., Witkowski, P. P., Zhang, Y., & Park, S. A. (2021). The orbital frontal cortex, task structure, 

and inference. Behavioral Neuroscience , 135 (2), 291 -300.  https://doi.org/10.1037/bne0000465 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

Bussell, J. J., Badman, R. P., Márton, C. D., Bromberg -Martin, E. S., Abbott, L. F., Rajan, K., & Axel, R. 

(2024). Representations of the intrinsic value of information in mouse orbitofrontal cortex. 

bioRxiv [Preprint] . https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.10.13.562291 

Butler, J. L., Muller, T. H., Veselic, S., Malalasekera, W. M. N., Hunt, L. T., Behrens, T. E. J., & Kennerley, S. 

W. (in press). Anterior cingulate neurons perform parallel processing of fixated and peripheral 

information to guide information sampling and choice. Nature Communications .

https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.08.463476 

Cai, X., Kim, S., & Lee, D. (2011). Heterogeneous coding of temporally discounted values in the dorsal and 

ventral striatum during intertemporal choice. Neuron , 69 (1), 170 -182. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.041 

Cai, X. Y., & Padoa -Schioppa, C. (2021). Neuronal activity in dorsal anterior cingulate cortex during 

economic choices under variable action costs. Elife , 10 (e71695), 1 -19. 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.71695 

Camille, N., Griffiths, C. A., Vo, K., Fellows, L. K., & Kable, J. W. (2011). Ventromedial frontal lobe damage 

disrupts value maximization in humans. Journal of Neuroscience , 31 (20), 7527 -7532. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/Jneurosci.6527 -10.2011 

Castro -Rodrigues, P., Akam, T., Snorasson, I., Camacho, M., Paixao, V., Maia, A., Barahona -Correa, J. B., 

Dayan, P., Simpson, H. B., Costa, R. M., & Oliveira -Maia, A. J. (2022). Explicit knowledge of task 

structure is a primary determinant of human model -based action. Nature Human Behaviour ,

6(8), 1126 -1141.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -022 -01346 -2

Cavanagh, S. E., Malalasekera, W. M. N., Miranda, B., Hunt, L. T., & Kennerley, S. W. (2019). Visual fixation 

patterns during economic choice reflect covert valuation processes that emerge with learning. 

PNAS , 116 (45), 22795 -22801.  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1906662116 

Cavanagh, S. E., Wallis, J. D., Kennerley, S. W., & Hunt, L. T. (2016). Autocorrelation structure at rest 

predicts value correlates of single neurons during reward -guided choice. Elife , 5.

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.18937 

Chen, W. Q., Liang, J. J. Y., Wu, Q. Y., & Han, Y. Y. (2024). Anterior cingulate cortex provides the neural 

substrates for feedback -driven iteration of decision and value representation. Nature 

Communications , 15 (1), 1 -15.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -024 -50388 -9

Cole, M. W., Bagic, A., Kass, R., & Schneider, W. (2010). Prefrontal dynamics underlying rapid instructed 

task learning reverse with practice. Journal of Neuroscience , 30 (42), 14245 -14254. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1662 -10.2010 

Cole, N., Harvey, M., Myers -Joseph, D., Gilra, A., & Khan, A. G. (2024). Prediction -error signals in anterior 

cingulate cortex drive task -switching. Nature Communications , 15 (1). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -024 -51368 -9

Costa, V. D., & Averbeck, B. B. (2020). Primate orbitofrontal cortex codes information relevant for 

managing explore -exploit tradeoffs. Journal of Neuroscience , 40 (12), 2553 -2561. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2355 -19.2020 

Cromer, J. A., Machon, M., & Miller, E. K. (2011). Rapid association learning in the primate prefrontal 

cortex in the absence of behavioral reversals. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 23 (7), 1823 -

1828.  https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21555 

Daffner, K. R., Mesulam, M. M., Scinto, L. F., Acar, D., Calvo, V., Faust, R., Chabrerie, A., Kennedy, B., & 

Holcomb, P. (2000). The central role of the prefrontal cortex in directing attention to novel 

events. Brain , 123 ( Pt 5) , 927 -939.  https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/123.5.927 

Elston, T. W., & Wallis, J. D. (2025). Context -dependent decision -making in the primate hippocampal -

prefrontal circuit. Nature Neuroscience , 28 (2).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -024 -01839 -5

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

Enel, P., Wallis, J. D., & Rich, E. L. (2020). Stable and dynamic representations of value in the prefrontal 

cortex. Elife , 9. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.54313 

Garrido, M. I., Barnes, G. R., Kumaran, D., Maguire, E. A., & Dolan, R. J. (2015). Ventromedial prefrontal 

cortex drives hippocampal theta oscillations induced by mismatch computations. Neuroimage ,

120 , 362 -370.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.07.016 

Hattori, R., Hedrick, N. G., Jain, A., Chen, S. Q., You, H. J., Hattori, M., Choi, J. H., Lim, B. K., Yasuda, R., & 

Komiyama, T. (2023). Meta -reinforcement learning via orbitofrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience ,

26 (12), 2182 -2191.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -023 -01485 -3

Hayden, B. Y., & Platt, M. L. (2010). Neurons in anterior cingulate cortex multiplex information about 

reward and action. Journal of Neuroscience , 30 (9), 3339 -3346. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4874 -09.2010 

Hollerman, J. R., & Schultz, W. (1998). Dopamine neurons report an error in the temporal prediction of 

reward during learning. Nature Neuroscience , 1(4), 304 -309.  https://doi.org/10.1038/1124 

Hunt, L. T., Behrens, T. E. J., Hosokawa, T., Wallis, J. D., & Kennerley, S. W. (2015). Capturing the temporal 

evolution of choice across prefrontal cortex. Elife , 4(e11945), 1 -25. 

https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.11945 

Hunt, L. T., Kolling, N., Soltani, A., Woolrich, M. W., Rushworth, M. F., & Behrens, T. E. (2012). 

Mechanisms underlying cortical activity during value -guided choice. Nature Neuroscience , 15 (3), 

470 -476, S471 -473.  https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3017 

Hunt, L. T., Malalasekera, W. M. N., de Berker, A. O., Miranda, B., Farmer, S. F., Behrens, T. E. J., & 

Kennerley, S. W. (2018). Triple dissociation of attention and decision computations across 

prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience , 21 (10), 1471 -1481.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -

018 -0239 -5

Jaegle, A., Mehrpour, V., & Rust, N. (2019). Visual novelty, curiosity, and intrinsic reward in machine 

learning and the brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 58 , 167 -174. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2019.08.004 

Kaanders, P., Nili, H., O'Reilly, J. X., & Hunt, L. (2021). Medial frontal cortex activity predicts information 

sampling in economic choice. Journal of Neuroscience , 41 (40), 8403 -8413. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/Jneurosci.0392 -21.2021 

Kafkas, A., & Montaldi, D. (2014). Two separate, but interacting, neural systems for familiarity and 

novelty detection: a dual -route mechanism. Hippocampus , 24 (5), 516 -527. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.22241 

Kennerley, S. W., Behrens, T. E. J., & Wallis, J. D. (2011). Double dissociation of value computations in 

orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate neurons. Nature Neuroscience , 14 (12), 1581 -1589. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2961 

Kennerley, S. W., Dahmubed, A. F., Lara, A. H., & Wallis, J. D. (2009). Neurons in the frontal lobe encode 

the value of multiple decision variables. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience , 21 (6), 1162 -1178. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21100 

Kennerley, S. W., Walton, M. E., Behrens, T. E. J., Buckley, M. J., & Rushworth, M. F. S. (2006). Optimal 

decision making and the anterior cingulate cortex. Nature Neuroscience , 9(7), 940 -947. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1724 

Klein -Flugge, M. C., Barron, H. C., Brodersen, K. H., Dolan, R. J., & Behrens, T. E. J. (2013). Segregated 

encoding of reward -identity and stimulus -reward associations in human orbitofrontal cortex. 

Journal of Neuroscience , 33 (7), 3202 -3211.  https://doi.org/10.1523/Jneurosci.2532 -12.2013 

Klein -Flugge, M. C., Bongioanni, A., & Rushworth, M. F. S. (2022). Medial and orbital frontal cortex in 

decision -making and flexible behavior. Neuron , 110 (17), 2743 -2770. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2022.05.022 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

Lee, D., Seo, H., & Jung, M. W. (2012). Neural basis of reinforcement learning and decision making. 

Annual Review of Neuroscience , 35 , 287 -308.  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -neuro -062111 -

150512 

Liebana, S., Laffere, A., Toschi, C., Schilling, L., Moretti, J., Podlaski, J., Fritsche, M., Zatka -Haas, P., Li, Y., 

Bogacz, R., Saxe, A., & Lak, A. (2025). Dopamine encodes deep network teaching signals for 

individual learning trajectories. Cell , 188 (14), 3789 -3805. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.05.025 

Matsumoto, M., Matsumoto, K., Abe, H., & Tanaka, K. (2007). Medial prefrontal cell activity signaling 

prediction errors of action values. Nature Neuroscience , 10 (5), 647 -656. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1890 

Matsumoto, M., Matsumoto, K., & Tanaka, K. (2007). Effects of novelty on activity of lateral and medial 

prefrontal neurons. Neuroscience Research , 57 (2), 268 -276. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2006.10.017 

Miranda, B., Butler, J. L., Malalasekera, W. M. N., Behrens, T. E. J., Dayan, P., & Kennerley, S. W. ( 2026). 

Neural signatures of model -based and model -free reinforcement learning across prefrontal 

cortex and striatum. Elife , 14 , RP106032.  https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.106032.3 

Monosov, I. E., Haber, S. N., Leuthardt, E. C., & Jezzini, A. (2020). Anterior cingulate cortex and the 

control of dynamic behavior in primates. Current Biology , 30 (23), R1442 -R1454. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2020.10.009 

Muller, T. H., Butler, J. L., Veselic, S., Miranda, B., Wallis, J. D., Dayan, P., Behrens, T. E. J., Kurth -Nelson, Z., 

& Kennerley, S. W. (2024). Distributional reinforcement learning in prefrontal cortex. Nature 

Neuroscience , 27 (3), 403 -408.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -023 -01535 -w

O'Neill, M., & Schultz, W. (2010). Coding of reward risk by orbitofrontal neurons is mostly distinct from 

coding of reward value. Neuron , 68 (4), 789 -800.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.09.031 

Rainer, G., & Miller, E. K. (2000). Effects of visual experience on the representation of objects in the 

prefrontal cortex. Neuron , 27 (1), 179 -189.  https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896 -6273(00)00019 -2

Ranganath, C., & Rainer, G. (2003). Neural mechanisms for detecting and remembering novel events. 

Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 4(3), 193 -202.  https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1052 

Rushworth, M. F. S., Noonan, M. P., Boorman, E. D., Walton, M. E., & Behrens, T. E. (2011). Frontal cortex 

and reward -guided learning and decision -making. Neuron , 70 (6), 1054 -1069. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.014 

Schuck, N. W., Cai, M. B., Wilson, R. C., & Niv, Y. (2016). Human orbitofrontal cortex represents a 

cognitive map of state space. Neuron , 91 (6), 1402 -1412. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.08.019 

Schultz, W., Apicella, P., & Ljungberg, T. (1993). Responses of monkey dopamine neurons to reward and 

conditioned stimuli during successive steps of learning a delayed response task. Journal of 

Neuroscience , 13 (3), 900 -913.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8441015 

Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997). A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science ,

275 (5306), 1593 -1599.  https://doi.org/10.1126/science.275.5306.1593 

Seo, H., & Lee, D. (2007). Temporal filtering of reward signals in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex 

during a mixed -strategy game. Journal of Neuroscience , 27 (31), 8366 -8377. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2369 -07.2007 

Sutton, R. S. (1988). Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine Learning , 3, 9 -

44. 

Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1987). A temporal -difference model of classical conditioning. Proceedings of 

the Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , 355 -378. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.03.736027 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Van Hoesen, G. W., Morecraft, R. J., & Vogt, B. A. (1993). Connections of the monkey cingulate cortex. In 

B. A. Vogt & M. Gabriel (Eds.), Neurobiology of Cingulate Cortex and Limbic Thalamus .

Birkhauser. 

Veselic, S., Gutierrez, E., El -Gaby, M., Reinert, S., & Sablé -Meyer, M. (2025). Cognitive maps in the 

prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience , 45 (46).  https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1358 -

25.2025 

Veselic, S., Muller, T. H., Gutierrez, E., Behrens, T. E. J., Hunt, L. T., Butler, J. L., & Kennerley, S. W. (2025). A 

cognitive map for value -guided choice in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Cell , 188 , 1 -15. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.03.038 

Wang, J. X., Kurth -Nelson, Z., Kumaran, D., Tirumala, D., Soyer, H., Leibo, J. Z., Hassabis, D., & Botvinick, 

M. (2018). Prefrontal cortex as a meta -reinforcement learning system. Nature Neuroscience ,

21 (6), 860 -868.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -018 -0147 -8

Williams, S. M., & Goldman -Rakic, P. S. (1998). Widespread origin of the primate mesofrontal dopamine 

system. Cerebral Cortex , 8(4), 321 -345.  https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/8.4.321 

Wilson, R. C., Takahashi, Y. K., Schoenbaum, G., & Niv, Y. (2014). Orbitofrontal cortex as a cognitive map 

of task space. Neuron , 81 (2), 267 -279.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.11.005 

Wojcik, M. J., Stroud, J. P., Wasmuht, D., Kusunoki, M., Kadohisa, M., Buckley, M. J., Costa, R. P., Myers, N. 

E., Hunt, L. T., Duncan, J., & Stokes, M. G. (2026). Learning shapes neural geometry in the 

primate prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience . https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -026 -02333 -w

Zhang, K., Bromberg -Martin, E. S., Sogukpinar, F., Kocher, K., & Monosov, I. E. (2022). Surprise and 

recency in novelty detection in the primate brain. Current Biology , 32 (10), 2160 -2173 .e2166. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2022.03.064