Title: The medial entorhinal spatial map is built on excitatory-inhibitory network motifs defined by their functional cell type and theta modulation

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850v1.full.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 21:08:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
The medial entorhinal spatial map is built on 

# excitatory -inhibitory network motifs defined by 

# their functional cell type and theta modulation 

Pauline Kerekes 1* , Marius Bauza 2 and Julija Krupic 1, 3*

1 UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, UK 

2 Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour, University College 

London, London, UK 

3 Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, 

Cambridge, UK 

*Correspondence: j.krupic@ucl.ac.uk (J.K.), p.kerekes@ucl.ac.uk (P.K.) 

# Abstract 

The medial entorhinal cortex (mEC) contains functionally specific neurons crucial for 

spatial memory and navigation , including grid, border, spatial, head direction, and cue 

cells . However, how these neurons interact to build spatial maps remains unclear. Here, 

using simultaneous recordings from hundreds of functionally defined mEC neurons in 

mice navigating virtual tracks with varying numbers of visual landmarks, we uncovered 

connectivity motifs that define the mEC functional network architecture and link it to the 

principles governing allocentric map formation. We found that connectivity between 

cells was cell -type -specific and grouped into subnetworks based on their function and 

theta modulation, with theta -modulated connections dominating over non -theta. 

Functionally distinct neurons preferentially connected to their own type, and their 

interactions were coordinated by a shared inhibitory pool of interneurons , with a higher 

proportion of excitatory -to -inhibitory connections than between excitatory c ells . This 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

was accompanied by the number of fields formed across all mEC cell types increasing 

sublinearly with the number of available cues . Grid cells showed the strongest relative 

connectivity to interneurons regardless of their theta modulation, linking otherwise 

largely isolated theta and non -theta streams. Grid cells were also least likely to form a 

field in response to cues. Together, the se findings reveal an mEC network architecture 

organised by cell type and theta dependency, in which inhibitory interactions , with grid 

cells as the strongest hub , play a central role in building the mEC allocentric map. 

# Main 

Functionally specialized neurons, such as grid 1, head direct ion 2, border 3, cue 4 and 

spatially tuned cells 5, constitute the core elements of the medial entorhinal (mEC) spatial 

map 6,7 . Collectively, these cells integrate diverse information about landmarks, 

distances, and th e direction of travel to construct a cohesive spatial map. However, the 

principles governing the field formation of functionally distinct mEC cells in response to 

visual cues have not been characterized. Because mEC excitatory cells are connected 

via a rich inhibitory cell network 8,9 , interneurons may play a key role in implementing 

coordination, similar to recent findings in the hippocampus proper 10,11 . However, unlike 

hippocampal place cells, mEC principal cells have markedly distinct functional 

properties and therefore may follow different rules of organization . Indeed, different 

inhibitory molecular cell types in the mEC have different e ffect s on functionally distinct 

principal cells 8,12,13 . Finally , given the role of theta oscillations in memory and 

navigation 6,14 , they may be expected to play an important role in network coordinat ion by 

providing temporal windows for local circuit interactions 14 –16 .

Here, we used high -throughput Neuropixels 2.0 recordings 17 in mice navigating virtual 

reality (VR) environments populated with different numbers of cues to simultaneously 

record from hundreds of functionally defined mEC cells to examine how their neural 

network architecture may underl ie the construction of mEC spatial maps. We revealed 

specific neural network motifs that structure mEC cell interactions and may support cue -

dependent field formation .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Results 

To study how medial entorhinal (mEC) cells collectively build a visual scene, we used 

Neuropixels 2.0 to record mEC grid cells 1 (GC, n= 944 across three grid modules ), head -

direction cells 2 (HD, n= 155 ), border cells 3 (BC, n= 186 ), spatially tuned cells 5 (SC, n= 760 )

and cue cells 4 (CC , n= 1115 ) in mice navigating in virtual reality (VR) environments (Fig. 

1a -c, and Extended Data Fig s. 1-4). The anatomical mapping revealed that different 

functional cell types were highly interspersed (Extended Data Fig. 5). 

Neural activity was recorded in mice navigat ing in nine -meter VR linear tracks with no 

cues (nC), with a single (1C), or multiple cues (C r, cue -rich) , and with a fixed reward at 

seven meters from the start (Fig. 1 d). Mice were teleported back to the start location once 

they reached the end of the track , with a 2-second dark inter -lap period to signal the end 

of the lap. The VR session followed an A-B-A-C experimental design , with a no -cue track 

as a baseline (A), a one -cue track as a probe (B) , and a cue -rich track as a final trial (C). 

The VR session was followed by a final recording in a square real enclosure (RE, 1m x 1m 

or 0.6m x 0.6m) to characterize the functional cell types recorded in the VR. The trials in 

VR were separated by a 2-minute dark inter -trial interval, during which the VR screens 

displayed a dark, homogeneous background, and no reward was given to the animal . The 

no -cue track consisted of identical homogeneous walls and floor with a random granula r

visual texture (Fig. 1 d-e, Extended Data Video 1) to ensur e that the mouse could only use 

self -motion cues (e.g., efference copy and optic flow) and/or time counting to estimate 

its location. The second track was identical to the first, with an additional one -meter -long 

proximal cue displayed on both walls, 2.5 meters from the start (Fig. 1 d-e and Extended 

Data Video 2) . There was no wall at the end of the no -cue and one -cue tracks. The final 

VR environment was a cue -rich track with nine one -meter -wide cues tiling the walls , and 

four pairs of distal cues positioned at 1, 3, 6, and 8 meters from the start (Fig. 1 d-e and 

Extended Data Video 3) . Prior to the A-B-A-C session, mice were trained on the cue -rich 

trac k for 4 -6 days until they reliably reduced their running speed 1-1.5m before the reward 

(Fig. 1 f). Th is deceleration was used as a benchmark to assess self -localization in all 

environments in which the mice were tested. 

No spatial fields formed away from the boundaries without visual cues 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

First, we investigated how different cell type s construct ed the spatial map in the absence 

of visual landmarks in the no -cue VR track . To assess the level of spatial activity, we 

calculated the number of spatial fields present along the track. The fields were defined 

as a group of spikes consistently fired on at least 50% of the visits of a specific track 

location (Extended Data Fig. 6). We found that , irrespective of functional type, most cells 

did not form stable fields along the track away from the boundaries , with fields forming 

almost exclusively at the start of the track (Fig. 2 a-c, and  Extended Data Fig. 7a ). The

number of cells that formed fields was consistently higher than in complete darkness 

trials in line with previous reports 18,19  (Fig. 2a -b; no cue vs. dark track: BC: 32/186 vs. 

0/186 ; CC : 132/1115 vs. 10/1115 ; HD : 20/155 vs. 0/155 ; GC : 44/944 vs. 10/944 ; SC :

61/760 vs. 4/760 ; permutation test: P=0 ). We hypothesized that the se fields may have 

been driven by changes in illumi nation during the transition between the no -cue 

environment and the dark inter -lap segment . Indeed, we observed that with the exception 

of grid cells, all functional cell types consistently showed an increase in firing rate as the 

animal went in and out of the dark inter -lap segment (Fig. 2d) . Grid cells peaked their firing 

only at the transition between no -cue track and dark interval, suggesting that they either 

underwent neural adaptation to the visual contrast or they may have signaled the end of 

the lap akin to the ‘event boundary ’ responses described in humans 20 .

Distance coding in grid cells without visual cues 

Grid cells can maintain periodic firing with a limited number of visual cues in 1D tracks 21 

or no cues 19,22,23  without forming stable fields . However, it is unclear whether such 

unanchored distance coding can support an animal’s ability to navigate to the reward 23 .

In line with the se previous studies , we found that g rid cells exhibited periodic activity in 

both the no -cue (Fig. 2e -f) and the dark track s without forming stable fields along the 

track . The spatial period of this activity was ~1.87 times larger than the grid scale 

measured in the two -dimensional real enclosure, scaled equally across all grid modules 

(Fig. 2g , Spearman correlation nC1: ρ=0.54, P=3.49 x 10 -55 ; nC2: ρ=0.6, P=1.21 x 10 -76 ;

dark: ρ=0.52, P=8.22 x 10 -56 ; ratio between VR and RE spatial period mean±s.d. : nC1 :

1.86 ±0.74 ; nC2 : 1.88 ±0.66; dark : 1.8 7±0.71 ). Importantly, we found that mice did not 

decrease their running speed in anticipation of the reward on the no -cue track (Fig. 2h ),

indicating that they were un able to accurately estimate their position without visual cues. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Th is suggest s that grid cell distance coding may not be sufficient to support accurate 

path -integration -based navigation in the absence of stable anchoring fields .

A single visual cue promotes field formation with a cell -type -specific spatial 

distribution 

Next, we  introduced a single prominent 1m wide visual landmark starting at 2.5 m to 

investigate how a spatial reference point closer to the reward would affect field formation 

and the mouse’s ability to estimate the goal location . Th e presence of the visual cue 

significantly increased the number of fields formed in all mEC cell types (Figs. 3a-b). The 

newly formed fields were mostly clustered at the start of the track and near the cue (Fig. 

3c, Extended Data Fig. 7b ), with d ifferent functional cell types preferentially encoding 

distinct parts of the cue . We used a cue score 4 to quantify the overlap between the field 

and the cue ( see Methods). The cue score of grid cells was significantly lower than all 

other cell types (Fig. 3d). Tog ether with spatial cells , they showed a bias to form fields 

towards the end of the cue (Fig. 3c), as indicated by a significant positive shift in their cue 

score ( Fig. 3e). Similarly to the no -cue track condition , grid cells encoded distance in the 

one -cue track ( Fig. 3f-g, Spearman correlation for the one -cue track 1C: ρ=0.58, P=5.74 

x 10 -69 , ratio between VR and RE spatial period mean±s.d.: 1.93 ±0.7 3).

Only 2. 2% ( 68/3160 ) of entorhinal principal cells could form a field between 4.5m and 

6.5m . Notably , the running speed of the mice either did not decrease before the reward 

site or started to decrease from one meter after the cue at 4.5m location (Fig. 3h). The 

latter suggests that , similar ly to the no -cue track , the mice may not have been able to 

accurately estimate their position starting from one meter after the cue onwards , where 

field formation collapsed. This rang e is consistent with the previous ly reported path -

integration range 24 .

Sublinear increase in the number of fields vs. cues in mEC cells 

We further hypothesized that the abundance of visual cues in the cue -rich track would 

lead to enhanced field formation, given that  the mice could accurately self -localize there 

(Fig. 1f). Indeed, the number of fields increased further  in the cue -rich environment (Fig. 

4a-c) . However, it was consistently smaller than the number of available cues across all 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

cell types, with grid cells showing the weakest ability to form fields in response to visual 

cues . This su ggests that field formation may be constrained by a coordinated inhibit ory 

cell network 8,25,26  rather than follow ing a simple stimulus -response rule .

The increase in field number was accompanied by higher spatial stability , as previously 

described in hippocampal cells 27 , and increased peak and mean firing rate s (Fig. 4d-f).

The highest mean firing rate was observed in the real environment across all cell types ,

reflecting the richness of available information there , including multiple sensory cues 

and vestibular inputs (Fig. 4f).

Grid cells show the strongest reciprocal connections with the local 

interneural network 

Ne xt, we asked how interneurons might contribute to the network architecture governing 

functionally defined medial entorhinal excitatory cells. We defined i nterneurons based 

on the peak -to -trough latency of their waveform s (≤0.3 ms ), as previously described 15,28 .

To examine excitatory connections from principal cells onto interneurons (E-I), w e used 

spike -time cross -correlograms from pairs of simultaneously recorded neurons (Fig. 5a) .

As previously suggested, a short -latency ( ≤5 ms) peak in the cross -correlogram indicates 

a putative monosynaptic excitatory connection 8,29 –32 . We calculated the fraction of 

putative monosynaptic connections per functional cell type as mice navigated the cue -

rich virtual track (Fig. 5b). In line with our hypothesis , we found that the relative number 

of projections from principal cells to interneurons was higher compared to relative 

projections from principal cells to other principal cells  (Fig. 5c, Extended Data Fig. 8 a,

410/48040 pairs (E -I) vs. 1188/288331 pairs (E -E) , permutation test corrected for 

difference in the number of pairs: P=0 ), despite the o verall lower number of interneurons 

compared to principal cells 33 . Grid cells showed the highest fraction of significant 

excitatory projections to inhibitory neurons (Fig. 5b, permutation test corrected for 

difference in pairs number: GC vs. BC P= 0.0015 ; GC vs. SC /CC P=0 ; GC vs. HD P=6 x 10 -

> 4

, Extended Data Fig. 8b-d). Most grid cells with putative connections to interneurons had 

a low head direction score ( mean ±s.d. head direction score 0.077 ±0.047 ; Extended Data 

Fig . 2a ), which was in line with previous findings showing that non -directional grid cells 

establish more connections to interneurons than conjunctive grid cells 8. Importantly,  in 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

most cases, single interneurons received inputs from several different functional cell 

types ( 61/92 , on interneurons receiving inputs from at least two neurons of different 

types , Fig. 5d) and sent inhibitory inputs to one or two cell types , mainly grid cells and cue 

cells (Fig. 5e-i). Taken together, this indicates that the mEC spatial map may indeed be 

shaped by a shared pool of inhibition, and grid cells may play a key role in building a 

cohesive map, as previously suggested using computational model ing 9,34 –36 .

Subnetwork connectivity by function and theta modulation 

Given the crucial influence of theta oscillatory activity on the generation of grid cell 

patterns 37 –39 , border cell acuity, and head -direction tuning 18 , w e hypothesized that theta 

modulat ion may play a prominent role in field formation , and cells may show distinct 

connectivity motifs based on their function and theta modulation . To test this, we divided 

principal cells and interneurons into theta and non -theta categories, based on their theta 

score s2 (Fig. 6a-b). We found that in both populations theta -modulated cells tended to 

have shorter peak -to -trough latencies (Fig. 6c), and higher peak and mean firing rates 

(Fig. 6d-e) . This suggests that theta - and non -theta cells may represent distinct neuronal 

subtypes .

Next, we calculated the connectivity matrix of significant excitatory monosynaptic 

connections from principal cells to other principal cells and interneurons grouped by 

their functional type and theta  modulation  (Fig. 6f). The connectivity matrix revealed four 

major connectivity motifs (Extended Data Fig. 8e -f). In the dominant motif , as described 

above, the principal cells preferentially innervated interneurons over other principal 

cells. Moreover, the recruited interneurons tended to share  similar theta affinity (Fig. 6g,

Wilcoxon rank -sum test : z= 5.8 9, P=3.89 x 10 -9). In the second motif , across E -E

connections between principal cells , principal neurons preferentially connected within 

their own cell type group and theta category , forming type -specific subnetworks, with 

consistent but weaker cross -subnetwork connectivity (Extended Data Fig. 8f ). Border 

cells also showed additional strong connections to theta -modulated head -direction 

cells.  In the third motif , projection s between theta -modulated cell pairs dominated over 

non -theta pairs (Extended Data Fig. 8g ). Grid cells were the only exception, showing 

comparable connectivity between theta and non -theta groups (Fig. 6h-i, permutation test 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

corrected for difference in pairs number, excitatory -to -inhibitory: GC P=0.1 6; BC P=0.02 ;

HD P=0.024 ; CC P=0.0094 ; SC P=3 x 10 -4; excitatory -to -excitatory: GC P=0. 57 ; BC 

P=0.6 3; HD P=0. 28 ; CC P=0; SC P= 4 x 10 -4). In the final ‘inhibitory ’ motif (Extended Data 

Fig. 8h ), non -theta principal cells tended to receive significantly more feedback inhibitory 

connections ( Fig. 6j, permutation test corrected for difference in pairs number: P=0) ,

despite theta -modulated principal cells tend ing to make more connections to 

interneurons compared to non -theta cells (motif 3) . T heta and non -theta interneurons 

sent comparable amounts of inhibitory projections to excitatory cells (Fig. 6k, 

permutation test corrected for difference in pairs number: P=0. 26 ). This suggests that the 

interactions between theta and non -theta streams may be implemented via an inhibitory 

network. 

Notably, theta -modulated cue cells sent the strongest projections to all other cell types 

(permutation test, corrected for differences in pair numbers: P=0), potentially serving as 

a hub for transmitting sensory information about visual landmarks to other mEC cells .

On the other hand , theta -modulated head direction cells were the strongest receiver of 

cross -type inputs , suggest ing that they may act as a prime integrator and the mEC output 

hub . The strongest excitatory cross -subnetwork afferents to grid cells came from theta -

modulated cue and border cells, which may provide information about external cues and 

the enclosure's geometry , respectively, acting as reset and anchoring points to stabiliz e

the grid , as previously suggested 40 –43 .

# Discussion 

We show that principal neurons in the medial entorhinal cortex operate via strongly 

interconnected subnetworks defined by their functional cell type and theta modulation .

While these subnetworks have distinct neural architectures , they also share some 

striking common network motifs. The most dominant motif revealed greater relative 

connections from principal cells to a common pool of interneurons than to other 

principal cells. We hypothesize that this communication via common inhibition provides 

the basis of field formation in building a coherent spatial map, resulting in a sublinear 

field -to -cue relation. Furthermore, we show ed that within the mEC map, theta -

modulated cue cells are the prime hub for integrating external sensory information and 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

conveying it to other cell types: t heir mean and peak firing rate s, stability, and field -to -

cue responses are most strongly associated with the number of cues , and they also 

provide the strongest projections to all other cell types. All cell types receive weak but 

consistent input s from multiple other cross -type principal cells , thereby integrat ing 

exteroceptive and interoceptive signals and subsequently send ing them to a shared 

inhibitory pool. 

With the exception of grid cells, principal cells tend to connect to other principal cells 

and interneurons of similar theta category, with theta connectivity dominating over non -

theta. This suggests that there may be two parallel streams encoding the same spatial 

variables. This is consistent with recent evidence showing that theta - and non -theta -

modulated head direction cells respond differently to sensory changes 52 . Together,  this 

points to a dominant theta -selective feedforward inhibitory loop , in which theta -

modulated principal cells tend to recruit a shared pool of theta -modulated interneurons, 

and other theta -modulated cross -type principal cells. T heta oscillations may provide a 

time window for integration of sensory and locomotion information during navigation, 

while the  non -theta stream may be involved in mnemonic information processing 14 . This 

hypothesis is in line with previous studies showing that layer II reelin cells, which send 

projections to the dentate gyrus and CA3, may be less theta -modulated compared to 

calbindin cells 44 which project to CA1. The former projections were suggested to be 

important for signal retrieval , while the la tter for active encoding during navigation 14 . Of 

all principal cells, grid cells show the strongest innervation with th e inhibitory network, 

connect ing the theta stream to the non -theta stream s. Based on this, we speculate that 

grid cells may play a key role in coordinating the scene building into a cohe sive map via 

inhibition , as previously suggested by the field -boundary -interaction model in rodents 

and bats 35,41,45 .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Methods 

Subjects 

Experimental procedures and animal use were performed in accordance with UK Home 

Office regulations of the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, following ethical 

review by the University of Cambridge Animal Welfare and Ethical Review Body (AWERB). 

All animal procedures were authorized under Personal and Project licences held by the 

authors. Fifteen male C57BL/6J mice aged 2 -6 months old were used as subjects. Mice 

were single -housed in cages on a reversed 12/12h light/dark schedule (with lights off at 

9:00 AM). 

Surgical Procedure 

Mice were anesthetized with 1 –2% isoflurane in O2, and 0.05mg/10g body weight 

Metacam and chronically implanted with either tetrode micro -drives or Neuropixels 2.0 

probes 17 . First, the skull was exposed, and four miniature screws were attached to the 

skull. One screw located to the left of the bregma served as a ground/reference electrode. 

A small craniotomy was performed above the posterior sinus , 3.4 mm from the midline. 

Next, the headplate was cemented . The mEC probes were implanted 3.2 -3.4 mm lateral 

to the midline and 0.2 -0.4 mm anterior to the transverse sinus, with an angle of 6 degrees 

in the anterior -to -posterior direction in the sagittal plane. Tetrodes were lowered in the 

brain at a depth of 0.6 mm. Neuropixels 2.0 probes were lowered in the brain at a depth 

of 2.5 -2.85 mm. The microdrives were fixed to the skull with dental cement . After surgery, 

the mice were placed in a heated chamber for 1 to 2h until fully recovered from 

an aesthesia, then returned to their home cages. During the first 72 h after the surgery, the 

mice received Metacam ( 0.05mg/10g body weight ) every 24 h. Mice were given 7 days of 

recovery with food and water ad libitum , after which the food restriction and behavioural 

training began. Four mice were implanted with eight tetrodes in the medial entorhinal 

cortex (mEC), eight were double implanted with eight tetrodes in left mEC and eight 

tetrodes in the right HP (the data not included in this study) , and six mice were implanted 

with a Neuropixels 2.0 probe in the left mEC. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Histology 

At the end of the recordings, the mice were culled with an overdose of pentobarbital ,

transcardially perfused with phosphate -buffered saline (PBS), and then fixed in 4% 

paraformaldehyde. Brains were extracted and stored in 4% paraformaldehyde for at least 

24 h. T he brains were sliced at 30 -50 microns in the sagittal plane . The brains implanted 

with tetrodes were stained with Nissl 46 and the brains implanted with Neuropixels 2.0 

were stained by immunochemistry targeting glial fibrillary acidic proteins (GFAP). For 

GFAP staining, the permeabilization solution used was PBS -Triton (PBS -T) x 0.25%, the 

blocking solution was 5% Normal Goat serum in PBS -Tx 0.1% (PBSGT), the primary 

antibody was a 1:500 dilution of rabbit anti -GFAP in PBSGT, and the secondary antibody 

was 1:500 Goat anti -rabbit 568 IgG (H+L). 

Data acquisition 

mEC n eurons were recorded as the head -fixed mice navigated in a one -dimensional 

virtual reality (VR) environment, followed by either one or two free -foraging 10 -20 -minute -

long trials in a square -shaped arena (real environment, RE). The V R length was 9m , and 

the RE dimension was either 0.6 x 0.6 m or 1 x 1 m . The animals were directly transferred 

from the VR to the RE without disconnecting the pre -amplifier headstage, to record the 

same cells in both setups and classify the different cell types recorded in V R offline based 

on their spatial spiking patterns in RE. 

Virtual Reality Environment 

We used our custom -built closed -loop 1D virtual reality (VR) environment , coupled with 

neural recordings from head -restrained mice as they ran linearly on a Styrofoam cylinder, 

facing two monitors displaying a visual scene controlled by the animal’s locomotion. The 

mice ran 9m -long laps and were teleported back to the start of the corridor at the end of 

each lap (the teleportation lasted 2 seconds). They recei ve d a milk reward at 7m on each 

lap. Two monitors were placed at a 90° angle to each other, in fron t of the mouse, to 

display the virtual scene generated by Unity Software . The rotation increments of the 

Styrofoam cylinder induced by the animal's locomotion were read by a rotary encoder 

and sent via an Arduino Uno microcontroller (Arduino Encoder library version 1.4.0) to a 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

custom -built LabVIEW program (v. 2018) that stored position and licking signal values at 

a 50 Hz sampling frequency. The milk rewards were delivered via a plastic tube positioned 

in front of the mouse’s snout. The delivery of the reward was controlled by voltage pulses 

sent from LabVIEW to a solenoid valve that functioned as a clamp on the plastic tube. 

During reward delivery , the tube was unclamped for 300 ms to dispense a drop of milk in 

front of the animal’s snout. Neural activity was recorded using a se parate computer 

running either the OpenEphys system for tetrode recordings or the spikeGLX software for 

Neuropixels 2.0 probes. Synchronization TTL pulses were sent from the LabVIEW program 

to the electrophysiology recording system to align electrophysiological and position 

recordings offline. 

Real Environment 

The real environment ( RE ) was designed to record neuronal activity from freely moving 

mice in a square -shaped arena (either 1x1m or 0.6x0.6m with a wall height of 0.5m). Two 

infrared light -emitting diodes (LEDs) were fixed on the animal’s head to track (x, y) 

position coordinates as well as the head orientation and direction of the animal, which 

were recorded and saved by a custom -built LabVIEW program. Synchronization TTL 

pulses were sent from the LabVIEW program to either the OpenEphys system for tetrode 

recordings or the spikeGLX software for Neuropixels 2.0 probes to align 

electrophysiological and position recordings offline. 

Behavioural training 

The goal of the behavio ural training was for mice to run on a virtual track to a reward while 

being head -fixed, and then to freely forage in the RE. After mice were trained on a cue -

rich track , they were tested on the One Cue protocol (n= 15 mice). During the first two 

days of habituation , the mice freely explored the cylinder, the head fixation bars, and the 

delivery reward tube of the VR setup . Over the next 2 -4 days, the animals were trained to 

be head -fixed and to walk or run on the cylinder, with VR scr eens displaying a uniform 

dark background and a milk reward delivered frequently to encourage movement. The 

duration of head -fixation was progressively increased from 1 -2 min to 20 min until the 

animal was comfortable on the wheel, ran the 9m track in < 1min, and consumed milk 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

upon reward delivery. The mice were then trained to run on a 9m -long cue -rich VR track, 

with rewards delivered at 7m. The training lasted 4-6 days, during which the animals 

decreased their running speed at 1 to 1.5m before the reward location , showing that they 

could estimate their position relative to the reward location in the virtual track . After the 

cue -rich training was completed, the experimental protocol started. A typical session for 

the one -cue protocol consisted of 4 trials of 20 -25 laps each. For each lap, the animal 

ran 9 meters, matching the length of the cue -rich track, and was then teleported back to 

the start . During teleportation , the screens displayed a uniform dark background for 2 

seconds (inter -lap interval, ILI). Between V R trials , the screens were displaying a uniform 

dark for 2 min (inter -trial interval, ITI). The reward was delivered at position 7m for all laps 

except during the dark inter -trial interval. The four V R trials were: 1) a track with no visual 

cue available (no cue 1, nC1) ; 2) a track with one visual cue (1 m wide) on the track wall 

centred at 3m and spanning the whole height of the wall (1 cue, 1C) ; 3) a repeat of the 

track used in trial 1 (no cue 2, nC2), 4) the same cue -rich track used during training (cue -

rich, Cr). The walls and floors of the no -cue and one -cue tracks had a random patter n. In 

addition, the virtual track had no end wall , so no looming visual signal would indicate that 

the end of the track was approaching as the animal progressed in it (see Extended Data 

Video s 1 and 2 ). After each V R recording session, the mice were recorded for 10 -20 min 

in the RE to functionally identify the mEC spatial cell types that were recorded in V R.

Spike extraction and spike clustering 

Per session, the RE and VR recordings were concatenated prior to automatic spike sorting 

using Kilosort 2 17 . The output clusters were then manually curated using our custom -

made Matlab program . Only spike clusters with a distinct waveform, a mean firing rate 

above 0.16 Hz and a refractory period ratio ≤0.8% were included to ensure high cluster 

quality. The refractory period ratio was calculated from the spike -time autocorrelation 

from 0 ms to 10 ms with a bin width of 0.5 ms . The refractory period ratio was defined as 

the sum of the spikes in the interval [0,1.5ms] in the auto -correlogram divided by the total 

nu mber of spikes . Putative d uplicate clusters were removed as described previously 4.

Briefly, the Pearson correlation coefficient between V R cue -rich trial smooth firing rate 

maps of cell pairs was calculated. If the correlation was above 0.8 , the pair was classified 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

as potentially overlapping . The cell with the lowest peak firing rate in the pair was 

removed from the analysis. 

Cell type c lassification 

Spatial cell types were classified based on firing rate maps recorded in the real 2D square 

enclosure . The firing rate map was constructed by dividing the number of spikes fired in 

each 2cm × 2cm bin by the respective dwell time in seconds. The smoothed firing rate 

map was obtained by applying adaptive smoothing 46 . Five different cell types were 

classified based on their spatial properties : grid cells (GC), mEC spatial ly tuned cells 

(SC), which showed spatial tuning in the real 2D enclosure , head direction cells (HD), 

border cells (BC ), and cue cells , which showed spatial tuning in the VR (Extended Data 

Fig. 1e) .

Cells were classified as grid cells using the GC score 1. Briefly, six local maxima were 

identified in the smoothed spatial autocorrelogram of the firing rate map as the six local 

maxima closest to the central peak (excluding the central peak itself). A mask on the 

spatial auto -correlogram, centred on the central peak but excluding the peak itself, was 

rotated in 30 -degree increments up to 150 degrees. For each rotation, the Pearson 

product -moment correlation coefficient was calculated against the unrotated mask. The 

GC score was calculated as the difference bet ween the minimum correlation coefficient 

for rotations of 60 and 120 degrees and the maximum correlation coefficient for rotations 

of 30, 90 , and 150 degrees. A cell was classified as a grid cell if the GC score was >0.27 46 .

The grid scale was defined as the radius of the circle , centred on the autocorrelation map 

that yielded the highest grid score. 

Cells were classified as spatially tuned mEC cells if their spatial information (SI) score 47 

was >1.3 . Cells were classified as head direction cells if the ir Rayleigh vector length was 

>0.19 46 . Cells were classified as border cells if the border score 3 was >2. Briefly, cells 

were pre -selected as putative border cells if the proportion of bins positioned <10 cm 

from the wall with a firing rate >20% of the maximal firing rate was >50%. On this pre -

selected set of cells, a mask with a value of 2 at each pixel on the surface of interest and 

0 elsewhere was created. The border score was calculated as the sum of the normalized 

firing rate at the border divided by the sum of the mask value over the total number of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

elements in the mask. All grid cells , spatial cells and border cells that passed the score 

criterion were individually inspected and discarded if misclassified by the algorithm 

(false positives) . Conversely, entorhinal cell s not classified as a grid , spatial or border cell 

by the algorithm , but with clear spatial characteristics, were included (false negatives) :

about 20 % of cells fell into these categories .

If cells were not classified in any of the cell types described above but had at least one 

spatial field formed in the VR cue -rich trial, these cells were classified as cue cells .

Entorhinal cells were assigned to only one cell type , even when they scored high on more 

than one criterion, in the following order of priority : GC, BC, SC , HD , CC . For instance, if 

a cell met the criterion for both border and head direction cells, it was classified as a 

border cell and not a head direction cell .

We defined interneurons based on the peak -to -trough latency of their waveforms ( ≤0.3 

ms), as previously described 15,28 .

Firing rate , spatial stability and cue score 

In VR, t he unsmoothed rate maps were obtained by dividing the number of spikes per 5cm 

bin by the respective dwell time in seconds. The peak firing rate w as calculated as the 

maximum value of the smooth rate map . The smooth rate map was obtained by applying 

the Gaussian kernel  𝑔 (𝑥 ) = 𝑒 − 𝑥 2 

> 2𝜎 2

with  𝜎 = 1 and  𝑥 ∈ {−1, 0, 1}. The mean firing rate was 

calculated as the total number of spikes per trial divided by the trial duration in seconds .

In the real enclosure and in the VR , stability was defined using the Pearson correlation 

coefficient between the smooth rate maps of the first and second hal ves of the recording. 

The peak and mean firing rate s were calculated as for the V R recording s.

The cue score was calculated as previously described 5. Briefly, a ‘cue template’ was 

defined as a 1D vector of length 180 spatial bins (bin size = 5cm) with bin values equal to 

1 where the visual cue is on the virtual track and 0 elsewhere. The spatial cross -

correlogram between the cue template and the smooth rate map of individual neurons 

was calculated . The cue score was defined as t he cross -correlogram peak (excluding 

local peaks with values below the average cross -correlogram value ) corresponding to the 

spatial shift closest to 0. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The three 2 -min -long dark inter -trial intervals were concatenated together for the dark 

track analysis . The annotation nC i ndicates an average between nC1 and nC2 data. 

Grid cells periodic firing in VR 

To determine whether grid cells exhibit periodic firing in 1D VR in the absence of cues, we 

used Fourier analysis of individual cells’ inter -spike distance distribution . Only grid cells 

that fired more than 200 spikes during a VR trial were included in this analysis. First, t he 

distribution of all pairwise inter -spike distances was calculated in centimetres. Then , the 

power spectrum of the distribution was calculated using the Fast Fourier Transform with 

padding to 2 13 points for high er resolution (a sampli ng frequency equal to 100 points per 

meter ). The power spectrum was smoothed by applying the Gaussian kernel  𝑔 (𝑥 ) =

𝑒 − 𝑥 2 

> 2𝜎 2

with  𝜎 = 5 and  𝑥 ∈ {−10 , −9, . . . , 9, 10 } and peaks exceeding 10% of the maximum 

of the smoothed power spectrum were selected. Only power spectrum peaks 

corresponding to spatial periods between 30 cm and 200 cm were included in this 

analysis . When two peaks or more were detected , the one corresponding to the highest 

frequency was used , and when no peak was detected, the cell was discarded from the 

analysis. 

Defining spatial fields in V R

Spatial fields were defined as consistent, recurring spike firing in a defined region, with 

little activity outside that region. Only cells with mean firing rate s between ≥0.16Hz and 

≤8.3Hz and classified as spatial in VR (see below) were used for the field detection 

analysis. 

Cells were classified as spatial in VR if their peak activity exceeded what would be 

expected by chance . To calculate the chance level, spike train and positions were offset 

100 times by a random time interval ranging from 20 seconds to the trial duration minus 

20 seconds, similar to what was previously described by Krupic and colleagues 46 . At each 

iteration, a surrogate smooth firing rate map was calculated and converted to a

logarithmic scale . The chance level was defined as the 99 th percentile of the 100 maximal 

value s (one per surrogate) . A cell was classified as spatial if at least one spatial bin in the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

smooth rate map converted to logarithmic scale was superior to or equal to the chance 

level. 

Next, to identify the individual fields, t he spikes were fi rst clustered using K -means (built -

in MATLAB function ‘kmeans’) with the optimal number of clusters set to the number of 

peaks + 4 (a peak was defined as a local maximum above 30% of the peak in the 

smoothed firing rate) . From this initial set, only c lusters at positions corresponding to 

firing rates above the 60th percentile of the maximal values calculated from the 

surrogates and spanning at least 2 consecutive bins were defined as fields . If two 

adjacent peaks in the smooth rate map were closer than six bins (i.e., 30 cm) , they were 

merged into a single field . Furthermore, the fields had to satisfy the stability criterion .

Specifically, fi elds were defined as stable if the 60 th percentile of the values of lap 

pairwise correlation was >0.6 and if there were at least two spikes per lap on at least 50% 

of the laps in the field. To calculate the Pearson correlation between the laps, for each 

lap, the smooth rate map with only the spikes in the field was calculated. 

Theta modulation analysis 

We calculated the theta modulation score of individual neurons recorded on the VR cue -

rich track using the Fast Fourier Transform power spectrum of the spike -train 

autocorrelograms (calculated on a 500 -ms window) 2. The theta score is defined as the 

mean spectral power within 1 Hz of each side of the peak in the 6 -10 Hz frequency band, 

divided by the mean spectral power between 2 -125 Hz. A cell is defined as theta -

modulated if the theta modulation score is >5. 

Connectivity matrix 

To determine the putative monosynaptic connections between mEC cells, we computed 

cross -correlograms for all the co -recorded pairs of the identified cell types (GC, SC, HD, 

BC, CC, and IN ). A cross -correlation peak value above the chance level within a synaptic 

time window indicates that one cell is significantly firing near the time the other cell is 

firing , and thus these cells may be connected 28 . Temporal cross -correlations were 

computed using a custom Python program and the PyTorch library for GPU -accelerated 

computation . For each cell of the pair, its spiking activity was stored in a vector with a bin 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

size of 1ms containing a value of 1 if at least one spike was emitted in that bin or zero 

otherwise. Cross -correlograms were generated on 30 -ms time windows by calculating 

the Pearson correlation coefficient between two spike vectors (from two co -recorded 

cells) for shifts incrementing in 1-ms increments . If the maximum value in the resulting 

cross -correlogram was detected in one of the synaptic windows defined as [ -10ms, 0ms] 

or [0ms, 10ms], then two test steps were performed to determine whether the peak is 

significant or not. The first step consisted of randomizing the indices of the spiking vector 

of one of the cells in the pair and running the correlation step described above against 

the non -randomized spiking vector of the other cell in the pair. The shuffling procedure 

was repeated 50 times per cell pair. The shuffle threshold was defined as the median 

value of the fifty 99 th percentile values of the shuffled cross -correlograms. If the peak in 

the pair cross -correlogram was above the shuffle threshold in either the [ -10ms, 0ms] or 

the [0ms, 10ms] window, then the second significance test was performed: half of the 

indices of one neuron spike train were randomly chosen and cross -correlated with the 

whole spike train of the other neuron of the pair to obt ain a half cross -correlogram. Then, 

the same half of the indices in the first neuron were randomized and cross -correlated 

with the whole spike train of the other neuron to get the shuffled half cross -correlogram. 

The peak of the half cross -correlogram was compared to the median of the values in the 

shuffled half cross -correlogram. This operation was repeated 10 times , and if the peak in 

the half cross -correlogram was above the shuffle threshold at least 9/10 times, then the 

pair was classified as significantly connected. Monosynaptic connections were defined 

as the pairs with cross -correlogram peaks occurring within 5 -10 ms time windows. 

Negative correlations were detected following the same procedure, using 1 st percentile 

instead of 99 th percentile in the first significance test and multiplying the cross -

correlogram values by ( -1) before comparing to the median value in the second 

significance test. 

Statistic al analysis 

Matlab R20 19a and Python 3.12 were used to perform basic statistical analyses. The 

standard error of the mean ( s.e.m. ) was used unless stated otherwise. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To compute the chance level of the percentage of cells forming a field in the no -cue track 

as a function of the number N of cells per cell type group, N numbers were drawn from 

the uniform distribution on the interval [0,1] over 500 iterations, and the 95 th percentile 

was calculated. 

To compute the chance level of the field position distribution, field positions were 

randomly allocated to position bins (bin size=5cm) , and the maximal number of fields per 

bin was stored. This was repeated for 500 iterations , and the 95 th percentile of the stored 

values was calculated. 

For repeated -measures data that are not normally distributed (e.g., the number of fields 

per cell as the animal is exposed to different virtual tracks with varying numbers of cues), 

the Kruskal -Wallis test was used. When the dataset was normally distributed (e.g. ,

running speed across tracks), one -way ANOVA was used. When pairs of datasets were 

compared using either the Kruskal -Wallis test or one -way ANOVA, the Bonferroni 

correction was applied. The normality of the dataset was checked using the MATLAB 

buil t-in function ‘kstest ’.

To compare the same set of cells between two different tracks (e.g. , stability, mean/peak 

firing rate, or number of fields per cell, including zero field), the Wilcoxon signed -rank test 

was used (for non -normally distributed and paired data). 

To compare sets of cells across two tracks (e.g., the number of fields per cell, excluding 

zero fields ), the Wilcoxon rank -sum test was used (for non -normally distributed data). 

To compare the frequency of occurrence of an event between two groups of the same size 

(e.g. the percentage of cells of one cell type that would form fields or have synaptic 

connections to other cells in two different tracks), a permutation test was used. 

Specifically, the two datasets were shuffled using the MATLAB built -in function 

‘randperm ’, and the difference in the number of occurrences between the two shuffled 

datasets was calculated. This was repeated for M= 5000 iterations , and the final p -value 

was calculated as the number of times the absolute value of the difference between the 

two unshuffled datasets was less than the absolute value of the difference between the 

shuffled datasets, divided by M. 

To compare the occurrence frequency of an event between two groups of different sizes ,

N and (N -k), the permutation test was used with two down -sampling steps. First, to 

compute the difference of occurrences between the unshuffled groups, the larger group 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

was randomly down -sampled to size (N -k) and the absolute difference was calculated, 

then averaged over 100 iterations. Second, to compute the difference of occurrences 

between the shuffled groups, the larger dataset was similarly down -sampled to size (N -

k) before computing the difference at each of the M shuffling iterations. The differences 

were effectively computed between groups of size (N -k). Specifically, the two datasets 

were shuffled using the MATLAB built -in function ‘randperm ’ and the difference in the 

number of occurrences between the two shuffled datasets was calculated. This was 

repeated for M iterations , and the final p -value was calculated as the number of times 

the absolute value of the difference between the two unshuffled datasets was less than 

the absolute value of the difference between the shuffled datasets, divided by M. To 

compare the proportion of cells with a field in the no -cue track across cell types, M=5000; 

for all tests performed in the connectivity analysis, M=1 0000. 

# Data availa bility 

Electrophysiological recording data generated in this study will be made available on the 

Zenodo data depository upon publication . Source data will be provided with this paper. 

# Code availa bility 

The codes for replicating the analyses in this study will be deposited on GitHub upon 

publication .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# References 

1. Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M. -B. & Moser, E. I. Microstructure of a 

spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature 436 , 801 –806 (2005). 

2. Boccara, C. N. et al. Grid cells in pre - and parasubiculum. Nat Neurosci 13 , 987 –994 

(2010). 

3. Solstad, T., Boccara, C. N., Kropff, E., Moser, M. -B. & Moser, E. I. Representation of 

geometric borders in the entorhinal cortex. Science 322 , 1865 –1868 (2008). 

4. Kinkhabwala, A. A., Gu, Y., Aronov, D. & Tank, D. W. Visual cue -related activity of 

cells in the medial entorhinal cortex during navigation in virtual reality. eLife 9,

e43140 (2020). 

5. Diehl, G. W., Hon, O. J., Leutgeb, S. & Leutgeb, J. K. Grid and Nongrid Cells in Medial 

Entorhinal Cortex Represent Spatial Location and Environmental Features with 

Complementary Coding Schemes. Neuron 94 , 83 -92.e6 (2017). 

6. Buzsáki, G. & Moser, E. I. Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the hippocampal -

entorhinal system. Nat Neurosci 16 , 130 –138 (2013). 

7. Tukker, J. J. et al. Microcircuits for spatial coding in the medial entorhinal cortex. 

Physiol Rev 102 , 653 –688 (2022). 

8. Buetfering, C., Allen, K. & Monyer, H. Parvalbumin interneurons provide grid cell -

driven recurrent inhibition in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nat Neurosci 17 , 710 –718 

(2014). 

9. Couey, J. J. et al. Recurrent inhibitory circuitry as a mechanism for grid formation. 

Nat Neurosci 16 , 318 –324 (2013). 

10. Geiller, T. et al. Local circuit amplification of spatial selectivity in the hippocampus. 

Nature 601 , 105 –109 (2022). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11. Valero, M. et al. Cooperative actions of interneuron families support the 

hippocampal spatial code. Science 389 , eadv5638 (2025). 

12. Miao, C., Cao, Q., Moser, M. -B. & Moser, E. I. Parvalbumin and Somatostatin 

Interneurons Control Different Space -Coding Networks in the Medial Entorhinal 

Cortex. Cell 171 , 507 -521.e17 (2017). 

13. Oulé, M., Badrinarayanan, S., Sundar -Maccagno, R. & Brandon, M. P. Medial 

Entorhinal VIP -expressing interneurons receive direct input from Anterior Dorsal 

Thalamus and are critical for spatial memory. 2024.08.26.609578 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.1101/ 2024.08.26.609578 (2024). 

14. Hasselmo, M. E., Bodelón, C. & Wyble, B. P. A Proposed Function for Hippocampal 

Theta Rhythm: Separate Phases of Encoding and Retrieval Enhance Reversal of Prior 

Learning. Neural Computation 14 , 793 –817 (2002). 

15. Mizuseki, K., Sirota, A., Pastalkova, E. & Buzsáki, G. Theta oscillations provide 

temporal windows for local circuit computation in the entorhinal -hippocampal loop. 

Neuron 64 , 267 –280 (2009). 

16. Neru, A. & Assisi, C. Theta Oscillations Gate the Transmission of Reliable 

Sequences in the Medial Entorhinal Cortex. eNeuro 8, ENEURO.0059 -20.2021 

(2021). 

17. Steinmetz, N. A. et al. Neuropixels 2.0: A miniaturized high -density probe for stable, 

long -term brain recordings. Science 372 , eabf4588 (2021). 

18. Dannenberg, H., Lazaro, H., Nambiar, P., Hoyland, A. & Hasselmo, M. E. Effects of 

visual inputs on neural dynamics for coding of location and running speed in medial 

entorhinal cortex. eLife 9, e62500 (2020). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19. Chen, G., Manson, D., Cacucci, F. & Wills, T. J. Absence of Visual Input Results in the 

Disruption of Grid Cell Firing in the Mouse. Curr Biol 26 , 2335 –2342 (2016). 

20. Zacks, J. M. Event Perception and Memory. Annual Review of Psychology 71 , 165 –

191 (2020). 

21. Jacob, P. -Y., Capitano, F., Poucet, B., Save, E. & Sargolini, F. Path integration 

maintains spatial periodicity of grid cell firing in a 1D circular track. Nat Commun 

10 , 840 (2019). 

22. Pé rez -Escobar, J. A., Kornienko, O., Latuske, P., Kohler, L. & Allen, K. Visual 

landmarks sharpen grid cell metric and confer context specificity to neurons of the 

medial entorhinal cortex. Elife 5, (2016). 

23. Peng, J. -J. et al. Grid cells accurately track movement during path integration -based 

navigation despite switching reference frames. Nat Neurosci 28 , 2092 –2105 (2025). 

24. Tennant, S. A. et al. Stellate Cells in the Medial Entorhinal Cortex Are Required for 

Spatial Learning. Cell Rep 22 , 1313 –1324 (2018). 

25. Miao, C. et al. Hippocampal Remapping after Partial Inactivation of the Medial 

Entorhinal Cortex. Neuron 88 , 590 –603 (2015). 

26. Zutshi, I. et al. Recurrent circuits within medial entorhinal cortex superficial layers 

support grid cell firing. Nat Commun 9, 3701 (2018). 

27. Bourboulou, R. et al. Dynamic control of hippocampal spatial coding resolution by 

local visual cues. eLife 8, e44487 (2019). 

28. Sirota, A. et al. Entrainment of neocortical neurons and gamma oscillations by the 

hippocampal theta rhythm. Neuron 60 , 683 –697 (2008). 

29. English, D. F. et al. Pyramidal Cell -Interneuron Circuit Architecture and Dynamics in 

Hippocampal Networks. Neuron 96 , 505 -520.e7 (2017). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30. Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H., Czurko, A. & Buzsá ki, G. Reliability and state dependence of 

pyramidal cell -interneuron synapses in the hippocampus: an ensemble approach in 

the behaving rat. Neuron 21 , 179 –189 (1998). 

31. Marshall, L. et al. Hippocampal Pyramidal Cell –Interneuron Spike Transmission Is 

Frequency Dependent and Responsible for Place Modulation of Interneuron 

Discharge. J. Neurosci. 22 , RC197 –RC197 (2002). 

32. Maurer, A. P., Cowen, S. L., Burke, S. N., Barnes, C. A. & McNaughton, B. L. Phase 

precession in hippocampal interneurons showing strong functional coupling to 

individual pyramidal cells. J Neurosci 26 , 13485 –13492 (2006). 

33. Gatome, C. W., Slomianka, L., Lipp, H. P. & Amrein, I. Number estimates of neuronal 

phenotypes in layer II of the medial entorhinal cortex of rat and mouse. 

Neuroscience 170 , 156 –165 (2010). 

34. Krupic, J., Bauza, M., Burton, S., Lever, C. & O’Keefe, J. How environment geometry 

affects grid cell symmetry and what we can learn from it. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 369 ,

20130188 (2014). 

35. Ginosar, G., Aljadeff, J., Las, L., Derdikman, D. & Ulanovsky, N. Are grid cells used for 

navigation? On local metrics, subjective spaces, and black holes. Neuron 111 ,

1858 –1875 (2023). 

36. Shipston ‐Sharman, O., Solanka, L. & Nolan, M. F. Continuous attractor network 

models of grid cell firing based on excitatory –inhibitory interactions. J Physiol 594 ,

6547 –6557 (2016). 

37. Brandon, M. P. et al. Reduction of Theta Rhythm Dissociates Grid Cell Spatial 

Periodicity from Directional Tuning. Science 332 , 595 –599 (2011). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38. Koenig, J., Linder, A. N., Leutgeb, J. K. & Leutgeb, S. The Spatial Periodicity of Grid 

Cells Is Not Sustained During Reduced Theta Oscillations. Science 332 , 592 –595 

(2011). 

39. Wang, Z ., Wang, T., Yang, F., Liu, F. & Wang, W. Intrinsic theta oscillation in the 

attractor network of grid cells. iScience 26 , 106351 (2023). 

40. Hardcastle, K., Ganguli, S. & Giocomo, L. M. Environmental boundaries as an error 

correction mechanism for grid cells. Neuron 86 , 827 –839 (2015). 

41. Krupic, J., Bauza, M., Burton, S. & O’Keefe, J. Framing the grid: effect of boundaries 

on grid cells and navigation. The Journal of Physiology 594 , 6489 –6499 (2016). 

42. Savelli, F., Luck, J. D. & Knierim, J. J. Framing of grid cells within and beyond 

navigation boundaries. Elife 6, e21354 (2017). 

43. Krupic, J., Bauza, M., Burton, S., Barry, C. & O’Keefe, J. Grid cell symmetry is shaped 

by environmental geometry. Nature 518 , 232 –235 (2015). 

44. Ray, S. et al. Grid -layout and theta -modulation of layer 2 pyramidal neurons in 

medial entorhinal cortex. Science 343 , 891 –896 (2014). 

45. Ginosar, G. et al. Locally ordered representation of 3D space in the entorhinal 

cortex. Nature 596 , 404 –409 (2021). 

46. Krupic, J., Burgess, N. & O’Keefe, J. Neural representations of location composed of 

spatially periodic bands. Science 337 , 853 –857 (2012). 

47. Skaggs, W. E., McNaughton, B. L., Gothard, K. M. & Markus, E. J. An Information -

Theoretic Approach to Deciphering the Hippocampal Code. in In 1030 –1037 (Morgan 

Kaufmann, 1993). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Acknowledgments 

We thank John O’Keefe for comments on the manuscript, Tereza Vargova for help with 

pilot experiments, Charlie Clarke -Williams for sharing the initial version of the cross -

correlation script, Bogdan Toader for optimization of the cross -correlation script an d

Marino Krstulovic for help with manual curation of the cells. 

This work was supported by the UK Dementia Research Institute, through UK DRI Ltd, 

principally funded by the Medical Research Council, by funding from the Cure 

Alzheimer's Fund (J.K.). J.K. is a Wellcome Trust/Royal Society Sir Henry Dale Fellow 

(206682/Z/ 17/Z). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, 

decision to publish , or preparation of the manuscript. 

# Author s information 

Authors and Affiliations 

1. UK Dementia Research Institute, University College London, London, UK 

Pauline Kerekes, Julija Krupic 

2. Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour, University College 

London, London, UK 

Marius Bauza 

3. Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, 

Cambridge, UK 

Julija Krupic 

Contributions 

Conceptualization: J.K. and P .K., Methodology: P.K., M.B. and J .K. , Experiments: P.K. with 

contributions from J.K , Data analysis: P.K. with contributions from J.K. and M.B., Funding 

acquisition: J.K. Writing —original draft: J.K. Writing —review and editing: J.K., P.K., M.B. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Corresponding authors 

Correspondence to Pauline Kerekes o r Julija Krupic .

# Ethics declarations 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 1 : Mice navigating in virtual reality environments coupled with high -throughput 

neural recordings in the medial entorhinal cortex 

a, Schematics of a recording session. Left, mice first ran in the virtual reality (VR) tracks followed 

by a trial in a real enclosure (RE). Right, Neuropixels 2.0. implanted in the left mEC. b, Firing rate 

maps (top left: peak firing rate) in the RE and raster plots in the first and second trials of no cue 

(nC 1 and nC2 ), one -cue (1C), cue rich (Cr) and dark (d) virtual tracks of six example cells 

belonging to different cell types (GC, grid cell; BC, border cell, HD, head -direction cell; CC, cue 

cell; SC, en torhinal spatially tuned cell). In all raster plots, the golden dashed line and the shaded 

area indicate the reward at 7m and the cue site, respectively . c, Implant location of the 

Neuropixels probe in the mEC . Red: anti -GFAP staining ; blue: DAPI staining . d, Top view of the 

virtual tracks. The horizontal and red arrows indicate respectively the direction of movement and 

the position of the screenshots shown in (e). e, Screenshots of the VR as seen by the animal . f,

Bottom, running speed as a function of the position (5cm per bin) for individual cue -rich (Cr) trials .

Each heat map is normalized by its maximum speed . Top, mean±s.d. of the individual trials 

running speed profiles. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 2 : Absence of spatial fields away from the boundaries without visual cues 

a, Typical rate maps (top left: peak firing rate) and raster plots of different functional cell types in 

the RE and in the first and second trials of no -cue (nC1 and nC2) and the dark virtual track s. b,

Distribution of the number of fields formed per cell for each cell type ; color code as shown in (a). 

All pixel values have been converted to base -10 logarithms for display . c, Field count per spatial 

bin (20cm per bin ) overlaid with the mean ± s.e.m. of the smooth firing rate (Hz , aligned by 

subtracting its minimum value ) per spatial bin (5cm per bin ) in nC1, nC2 , and dark tracks. The 

gray dashed line indicates the chance level for the field distribution. d, The average firing rate 

(100ms bin ) during the dark inter -lap interval (grey shade ). Each trace is aligned by subtracting its 

average value. 

e, A typical grid cell showing periodic activity in the no -cue track . Left: raster plot of the spikes as 

a function of the VR track position . Bottom: magnified view of the red inset above. Right: the 

corresponding FFT power spectrogram as a function of the spatial frequency showcasing a 

prominent peak at a spatial period of 55 cm , which was ~1.8 times the grid scale (cm) in RE (scale: 

top right corner of the rate map ). Scale bar = 50 cm. f, Same as (a) for a grid cell with a larger scale. 

g, Distribution of grid scale in RE and their corresponding scales in VR measured in the first (nC1, 

left ) and second (nC2, middle ) no -cue and in the dark (right) tracks . h, Running speed as a 

function of the position for nC1 (top), nC2 (middle) , and dark (bottom) trials . Each heat map is 

normalized by its maximum speed. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 3: A single visual cue triggers the emergence of fields with a cell -type -specific 

spatial distribution 

a, Typical rate maps and raster plots of different functional cell types in RE and in the one -cue 

(1C ) VR track , respectively . b, The a verage number of fields (including cells with zero field) per cell 

type in the nC (lighter shade) was significantly lower than in the 1C (darker shade) track (Wilcoxon 

signed -rank test: GC z= -8.25, P=1.58 x 10 -16 ; BC z= -6.88, P=6.01 x 10 -12 ; HD z=  -5.52, P= 3.32 x 10 -

> 8

; CC z= -15.65, P=3.38 x 10 -55 ; SC z=  -11.05, P= 2.21 x 10 -28 ). Grid cells were significantly less likely 

to make a field in the 1C track compared to all other cell types (Wilcoxon rank -sum test: BC vs. 

GC z= -9.6 8, P=3.8 4 x 10 -22 ; HD vs. GC z= -6.02 , P=1.73 x 10 -9; CC vs. GC z= -11.2 9, P=1.4 9 x 10 -29 ;

SC vs. GC z =-6.93 , P=4.15 x 10 -12 ) c, Field count overlaid with the smooth firing rate in the 1C track 

(as in Fig. 2c) . d-e, Average cue score (d) and corresponding spatial shift (e) . The cue score was 

lower in grid cells compared to all other cell types (Kruskal -Wallis test with Bonferroni correction: 

HD vs. GC P= 2.8 x 10 -6; SC vs. GC P=1.69 x 10 -9; BC vs. GC P=7. 57 x 10 -7; CC vs, GC P= 0.0011 ). 

There was a significant shift in GC and SC (mean±s.e.m. spatial shift values, one -sample t -test: 

GC 19.82±7.13, t=2.78, df=109, P=6.4 x 10 -3; BC 0.93 ±6.67 , t= 0.14 , df= 74 , P=0.89 ; HD 7.28 ±8.46 ,

t= 0.86 , df= 45 , P=0.39 ; SC 18.51 ±5.01 , t=  3.69 , df= 184 , P= 2.99 x 10 -4; Wilcoxon signed -rank test: 

CC 5.04 ±3.55 , z= 1.22 , P=0.22 ). Only cells forming at least one field were included. f, Typical 

Fourier spectrograms shown in Fig. 2e of different scale grid cells . The spatial period in VR (cm) 

in the 1C track (above the FFT power peak ), increases with the grid scale . Grid scale (cm) 

indicated above the 2D firing rate map s. Scale bar : 50 cm. g, Grid scale in 1C VR track vs. its 

respective grid scale in 2D RE . h, Normalized average r unning speed in the 1C track. The black 

arrow indicates the position at which some animals begin to decrease their speed (~1m after the 

cue) , suggesting their anticipation of the reward from this point .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 4: Sublinear increase of the number of fields per entorhinal cell as more visual 

cues are available 

a, Typical rate maps (top left: peak firing rate) and raster plots of different functional cell types in 

RE and in the cue -rich (Cr) VR track, respectively. b, Distribution of the number of fields formed 

per cell for each cell type in cue -rich (top) and one -cue (bottom) track; color code as shown in 

(a). All pixel values have been converted to base -10 logarithms for display. c, Average number of 

fields ( excluding cells with zero field) per cell type in the one -cue ( 1C, lighter shade) and cue -rich 

(Cr, darker shade) tracks (number of fields mean±s.e.m. 1C vs. Cr , Wilcoxon rank -sum test: GC 

1. 58 ±0.09 vs. 2.58±0.06, z= -8.1 8, P=2.89 x 10 -16 ; BC 1.39 ±0.07 vs. 2.72 ±0.12 , z= -7.17 , P=7.43 x 

10 -13 ; HD 1.63 ±0.12 vs. 2.46 ±0.15  z= -3.74 , P=1.87 x 10 -4; CC 1.55 ±0.04 vs. 2.79 ±0.04 , z= -16.14 ,

P=1.27 x 10 -58 ; SC 1.5 5±0.06 vs. 2.58 ±0.0 6, z=  -9.45 , P= 3.27 x 10 -21 ). d-f, Average spatial stability 

(d), peak firing rate ( e), and mean firing rate ( f) measured in different VR tracks and RE for different 

functional cell types. The color code for the cell type is as in (a). The spatial stability increased in 

all cell types as more cues were added (stability mean± s.e.m. 1C vs. Cr, Kruskal -Wallis test with 

Bonferroni correction: GC 0.18 ± 7 x 10 -3 vs. 0.53 ± 8.10 -3, P=2.28 x 10 -119 ; BC 0.53 ±0.022 vs. 0.7 1

± 0. 015 , P=9.54 x 10 -6; HD 0.47 ±0.02 vs. 0.63 ±0.021 , P=3.44 x 10 -4; CC 0.45 ± 0.007 vs. 

0.72 ±0.004 , P=5.53 x 10 -94 ; SC 0.41 ±0.01 vs. 0.66 ±0.009 , P=1.13 x 10 -47 ). The peak firing rate 

increased in all cell types as more cues were added (peak firing rate mean± s.e.m. 1C vs. Cr, 

Kruskal -Wallis test with Bonferroni correction: GC 8.92 ± 0.16 vs. 14.12 ± 0.3, P= 8. 76 x10 -37 ; BC 

9.78 ±0.59 vs. 13.1 1±0.71 , P=0.0061 ; HD 7.06 ±0.54 vs. 9.67 ±0.68 , P=0.011 ; CC 9.07 ±0.16 vs. 

12.76 ±0.19 , P=1.61 x 10 -54 ; SC 8.27 ±0.23 vs. 13 ±0.36 , P=4.81 x 10 -19 ). The mean firing rate 

significantly increased in border cells , spatial cells and cue cells as more cues were added 

(average firing rate mean± s.e.m. 1C vs. Cr, Kruskal -Wallis test with Bonferroni correction: GC 

3.34 ± 0.065 vs. 3.27 ± 0.067, P=1; BC 2.32 ±0.14 vs. 3.11 ±0.18 , P=7.86 x 10 -3; HD 2.13 ±0.14 vs. 

2.51 ±0.16 , P=0.96 ; CC 3.65 ±0.061 vs. 4±0.052 , P=7.64 x 10 -7; SC 2.2 ±0.062 vs. 2.7 ±0.068 , P=5.54 

x 10 -7). Significant difference between consecutive datapoints is indicated with an asterisk using 

the same color code as for cell types .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 5: Grid cells show the strongest reciprocal connections with the local 

interneural network 

a, Eight typical examples of cross -correlograms showing putative monosynaptic excitatory 

connections between two neurons with their rate maps shown on the right: a connecting (top) 

and connected (bottom) neuron . Cell types are indicated on the top left. The gray shaded area 

indicates the monosynaptic delay (1 to 5ms). b, Connectivity m atrix of the percentage of 

monosynaptic excitatory connections (connecting neuron s: y-axis ; connected neuron s: x-axis ).

Each bin indicates the proportion of significant connections among the total number of 

connections calculated for a given pair type . c, Percentage of monosynaptic excitatory 

connections for excitatory -to -inhibitory (E -I) and for excitatory -to -excitatory (E -E) neuron pairs. d,

Pie chart: Percentage of interneurons connected (excitatory connection) by one (light gray) or 

more than one (dark gray) principal cell (s) . Histogram: distribution of the number of different cell 

types connecting single interneurons (o nly interneurons connected by at least two principal cells 

are included ). e, Two examples of inhibitory connections from interneurons to grid cells shown 

as in (a). f, Connectivity m atrix as in (b) of the percentage of significant monosynaptic inhibitory 

connections per type of neuronal pair. g, An example interneuron (pink) sending inhibitory 

connections to both a cue cell (gr ey) and a border cell (green) in the cue rich track . Note that t he 

two target cells were inhibited along the same left -side wall in the RE (bottom rate maps). h,

Raster plots of the spiking activity in the cue -rich track of the CC and BC shown in (g) . i, Pie chart: 

Percentage of interneurons connecting (inhibitory connection) one (light gray) or more than one 

(dark gray) principal cell(s). Histogram: distribution of the number of different cell types receiving 

inhibitory connections from single interneurons (only interneurons connecting at least two 

principal cells are included). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 6: The recruitment of the inhibition is stronger in theta -modulated networks 

except for grid cells 

a-b, Typical examples of a uto -correlograms of T- and an NT - principal cells (E -T and E -NT) and 

interneuron s (I -T and I -NT) . Top -right : theta score. c, Mean ± s.d. of the spike waveforms (left) and 

mean ± s.e.m. of the waveform peak -to -through widths (right) for T- and NT - principal cells and 

interneurons (Wilcoxon rank -sum test waveform width interneurons T vs. NT: z= -2.21, P=0.0268; 

principal cells T vs. NT: z= -19.9, P= 3.61 x 10 -88 ). d-e, Mean ± s.e.m. peak and mean firing rate for 

T- and NT - principal cells and interneurons (mean + s.e.m. mean firing rate interneurons T vs. NT: 

4.99 ±0.32 Hz vs. 3.42 ±0.49Hz, Wilcoxon rank -sum test: z=7.78, P=7.16 x 10 -15 ; mean + s.e.m. 

mean firing rate principal cells T vs. NT: 3.49 ±0.04Hz vs. 3.22 ±0.05Hz, Wilcoxon rank -sum test: 

z=  5.15, P=2.55 x 10 -7; mean + s.e.m. peak firing rate interneurons T vs. NT: 8.54 ±0.49 Hz vs. 

7.61 ±1.01Hz, Wilcoxon rank -sum test: z=5.62, P=1.9 x 10 -8; mean + s.e.m. peak firing rate 

principal cells T vs. NT: 14.33 ±0.22Hz vs. 11.97 ±0.21Hz, Wilcoxon rank -sum test: z=8.78, P=1.72 

x 10 -18 ). f, Percentage s of putative monosynaptic excitatory connections as a function of the cell 

type and the theta category . g, Theta score s distribution (mean : red; median : black) of 

interneurons connected by either T- or NT - principal cells. h, Percentage of monosynaptic 

excitatory connections from T- or NT - (darker and lighter shade respectively ) principal cells to 

inhibitory neurons of the same theta category. i, Same as ( h) for excitatory -to -excitatory 

connections. j, Percentage of monosynaptic inhibitory connections from interneurons (of any 

theta category) to either theta principal cells (black) or non -theta principal cells (gray). k,

Percentage of monosynaptic inhibitory conn ections from theta interneurons (T, dark pink) or non -

theta interneurons (NT, light pink) to principal cells (of any theta category). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Extended Data Fig. 1: Recording probes , anatomical location , and cell type 

classification scores 

a-b, Sagittal sections of the left mEC stained for GFAP (Alexa Fluor 568, red) and cell nuclei (DAPI, 

blue) in five mice implanted with Neuropixels 2.0 (a, e ach section shows a different Neuropixels 

shank ; left -most is putative shank 0) and Cresyl violet for tetrode implants (b) . The number above 

each section indicates the estimated medio -lateral position . The scale bar for (a) and (b) is 0.5 

mm. c, Distribution of the grid scales across mice and clustering (using k -means) in three 

modules (m1 to m3) . Mice implanted with t etrode s are pooled together ( left ) and Neuropixels 

animals (M83 -88) plotted separately. d, Ratio between the average GC scale s of two adjacent 

modules for the animals M83, M87 and M88 (bla ck dots for single animals; red dots for the 

average). e, Average grid (GC), border (BC), spatial information (SI) and head direction (HD) 

scores for the five cell types. GC had the highest grid score (GC vs. BC /HD/CC/SC P<0.001 ), BC 

the highest BC score (BC vs. GC/HD/CC/SC P<0.001) , BC and SC had a similar SI score value (BC 

vs. SC P=0.33) and both had the highest SI score ( BC vs. GC/HD/CC P<0.05; SC vs. GC/HD/CC 

P<0.001 ), HD had the highest HD score (HD vs. GC/BC/CC/SC P<0.001 , Kruskal -Wallis test with 

Bonferroni correction ). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Extended Data Fig. 2 : Example grid and border cells activity in the real enclosure. 

a-b Example of randomly selected grid cells (a, N=200 /944 cells ) and border cells (b, N=186 /186 

cells ) spatial activity in the real enclosure (RE) as rate maps (left) and head direction tuning as 

polar plots (right). 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint Extended Data Fig. 3: Example spatial cells and cue cells activity in the real 

enclosure. 

a-b Example spatial cells (a, N=200 /760 cells ) and cue cells (b, N=200 /1115 cells ) spatial activity 

in the real enclosure (RE) as rate maps (left) and head direction tuning as polar plots (right). 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint Extended Data Fig. 4: Example head direction cells activity in the real enclosure. 

Example head direction cells (N= 155 /155 cells ) spatial activity in the real enclosure (RE) as rate 

maps (left) and head direction tuning as polar plots (right). 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint Extended Data Fig. 5: Distribution of the cell types on the Neuropixels 2.0 shanks 

a, Anatomical distribution of grid cells (GC) on the four shanks of the Neuropixels 2.0 probe for 

individual mice (M83 -88). Each bin corresponds to a recording group. The y -axis and x -axis show 

the dorsal -to -ventral and lateral -to -medial axes, respectively . The number above each heatmap 

is the maxim um number of cells per recording group. Each heat map is normalized by its maxim al 

number of cells / recording group . b-e, same as (a) for border, head direction, cue , and spatially 

tuned cells. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Extended Data Fig. 6: Examples of the field detection algorithm output 

Fourteen typical e xample s of raster plots of different neurons recorded in cue -rich VR tracks (left, 

black dots showing spikes ) with identified fields shown in different colors (right) . The unstable 

fields are shown in gray and have been excluded from the analysis. A field was classified as 

unstable if in -field spikes were present on less than 50% of the laps (example cell 11 ) and/or if the 

lap -to -lap stability was too low (example cell s 6 and 8 ). Eyeballing inspection confirmed a correct 

field identification >80% of the time. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Extended Data Fig. 7: Example cell activity in the no -cue and one -cue virtual track s

a-b, Forty -eight typical examples of grid (GC), border (BC), head direction (HD), cue (CC) and 

spatially tuned (SC) activity in the first trial of the no -cue (a) and in the one -cue (b) VR track s. The 

cell type is indicated on the left (eight different cells per cell type) . The golden vertical dash ed line 

indicates the location of the reward and the shaded area the cue location in (b) .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 3, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.02.735850 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Extended Data Fig. 8 : Characterization of the excitatory and inhibitory connections 

as a function of cell types and theta categories 

a, Percentage of putative monosynaptic excitatory -to -inhibitory connections for individual mice. 

b, The p ercentage of monosynaptic excitatory -to -inhibitory is higher than excitatory -to -excitatory 

connections for all cell type s except HD (permutation test corrected for unequal number of pairs: 

P=0 for GC and SC; P=0.0119 for BC ; P=0.0023 for CC; P=0.0973 for HD) . c, Comparison of the 

percentage of monosynaptic excitatory -to -inhibitory per cell type (GC sends more inputs to 

inhibitory neurons than all other cell types) . d, Percentage of monosynaptic excitatory -to -

inhibitory connections per cell type for individual mice.  e-h, connectivity motifs in mEC neurons: 

Motif 1: a higher number of projections from principal cells to interneurons (red rectangle) than 

to other principal cells (e); Motif 2: a higher number of projections between cells that belong to 

the same cell type (f); Motif 3: higher number of projections between theta -modulated (red) than 

between non -theta -modulated (black) cells (g); Motif 4: non -theta modulated cells receive more 

inhibitory projections than theta modulated cells (h) .