Title: Critical period plasticity enables credit assignment

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
1

Title : Critical period plasticity enables c redit assignment 

Authors : Ruth J. Meier* 1,2 , Salomon Muller* 3, Bin Wang 3, Kamila Mizerska 1, Sania Jain 1, Thomas Fothergill 1, Julia 

Mercer 1, Coleman Klapheke 1, Julia DiSano 1, Nikola Milicic 1,6 , Ruohong Wang 1,2 , Sujatha Narayan 4, Joe Li 5, Kurt Weiss 5,

Efrén Álvarez -Salvado 1, Misha B. Ahrens 4, Masahiko Hibi 7, Jan Huisken 5,8 , Kevin W. Eliceiri 5,9 , and David E. Ehrlich ☯1

* these authors contributed equally  

> ☯

to whom correspondence should be addressed: dehrlich@wisc.edu 

Affiliations : 1-Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA; 2 -Neuroscience Training 

Program, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA; 3 -Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Department of Neuroscience, 

Kavli Institute for Brain Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA; 4 -Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute; 

Ashburn, VA 20147, USA; 5 -Morgridge Institute for Research, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA; 6-Integrative Biology 

Graduate Program, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA; 7 -Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, 

Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan; 8 -Department of Biology & Psychology, Georg -August -Universit y Göttingen, Gottingen, Germany. 9-Center for 

Quantitative Cell Imaging, University of Wisconsin -Madison, Madison, WI 53706 

Contents: 

4 main Figures 

9 Supplemental Figures 

1 Table 

1 Appendix 

Abstract: 

Synaptic plasticity is often guided by instructive inputs to neural circuits, but learning only succe eds when these 

instructions re ach neurons that medi ate relevant outputs . This create s the credit assignment problem: how does a neuron 

receive instructions suited to its own behavioral function? Here we report a developmental mechanism that enables credit 

assignment by using instructive inputs to organize the downstream architecture through which learning is expressed . In 

the olivocerebellar learning system , the inferior olive provides instructi ve inputs that guide plasticity within the 

cerebellum. During circuit assembly in zebrafish , we find these same inputs regulate long -range c erebellar projections 

during a highly plastic, two -day critical period . Developmental experience caused specific maturation of projections to 

targets that were coactiv ated with olivary inputs. Mathematical theory and computational modeling show how the 

resultin g architecture constrains later learning, such that a single input can scu lpt downstream connectivity and then 

leverage that circuit to assign credit. Simulated learning became paradoxically more robust if we reduc ed plasticity after a

developmental critical period , protect ing key architecture from corruption during learning . Thus , instr uctive inputs can 

first build the circuits they later teach, coordinating development and learning to enable effective credit assignment. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

Introduction :

Throughout the brain, learning is encoded by plasticity at synapses far upstream of where behavioral 

consequences ultimately emerge. For synaptic changes to reliably improve performance, instructive inputs that guide 

plasticity must reach the specific neur ons capable of appropriately modifying network output, a challenge known as the 

credit assignment problem 1,2. Neural circuits across phylogeny and brain region assign credit by virtue of their 5

architecture, constraining which neurons receive a given instruction and thereby ensuring plasticity is directed to sites of 

suitable downstream influence 3-5. For example, precise anatomy organizes cerebellar learning , in which the inferior olive 

(IO) delivers instructions to the specific Purkinje cells at which local plasticity can improve performance , despite lacking 

explicit knowledge of the downstream structures through which plasticity manifests behaviorally 6-13 . However, t he origins 

of anatomical mechanisms for credit assignment remain mysterious .10 

Circuit architecture for credit assignment may be sculpted by experience early in life. While basic circuit 

blueprints are specified genetically as a scaffold of cell types and projections on which learning will later operate 14 -18 , a 

capacity to adapt wiring to experience may be advantageous or essential. Tasks of high dimensionality and directional 

specificity require granular registration of instructive inputs 9,15,19 . Furthermore, sensitivity to experience could afford 

flexibility to adapt circuits to the experience of the organism rather than genetically specified representations and tasks. 15 

For example, in sensory systems, where connectivity is commonly adapted to early sensory experience during transient, 

plastic ‘critical periods’, patterned activity reinforces coactive inputs, prunes inactive ones, and tunes circuits to the 

statistics of t he sensed world 20 -22 . Furthermore, early experience regulates not only sensory innervation but also cerebellar 

projections to the balance -related vestibular nuclei , indicating adaptability of precise cerebellar architecture 23,24 .

Here we examined whether principles of experience -dependent circuit development act meaningfully on credit 20 

assignment. Using perturbative experiments in the assembling cerebellum of the externally developing zebrafish 

combined with mathematical theory and computational modeling, we discovered experience -dependent circuit 

development acts directly on the architecture for credit assignment. Specifically, we find the instructive pathway from IO 

regulates Purkinj e cell projections logically based on experience, with attendant behavioral changes. We demonstrate how 

a correlation -based rule for developmental plasticit y, guided by the instructive inputs that later guide plasticity for 25 

learning, can preconfigure the olivocerebell ar system for credit assignment. Finally, we reveal why restricting 

developmental plasticity to a critical period is essential for supporting lifelong memory expression. Together, these results 

outline a role for instructive inputs to first construct the circuits t hey later teach, a single pathway orchestrating 

development and learning in an economical solution to credit assignment. 

30 

Results: 

A critical period for plastic cerebellar projections 

We devised an approach to study the role of the IO in cerebellar development and function, leveraging an 

evolutionarily conserved circuit architecture and the optical transparency of developing zebrafish ( Fig. 1A )25 . We 

screened for developmental plasticity by imaging the assembling olivocerebell ar system of 757 fish, enabled by the 35 

Flamingo light -sheet microscopy initiative (https://huiskenlab.com/flamingo/). Immature circuits are often sensitive to 

perturbation only transiently, so we first evaluated developmental plasticity windows. We activated Purkinje cells at 

variable phases of cerebellar development using a chemogenetic approach . Transgenic fish expressed exogenous capsaicin 

receptor under a Purkinje cell -specific promoter, alongside a pan -neuronal nuclear -localized calcium indicator to validate 

activation specificity and regis ter anatomy ( Fig. 1B ; Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP; elavl3:H2B -GCaMP7f; nacre -/-))26,27 .40 

Because zebrafish possess no endogenous capsaicin receptor, systemic application resulted in highly specific , inducible 

activation of Purkinje cells ( Fig. 1C ). 

Stimulation during a brief critical period caused lasting effects on long -range projections of Purkinje cell s. We 

stimulated Purkinje cells with capsaicin for 7 hours on 6, 7, 8, or 9 days (post -fertilization) and then examined 

morphology at 12 days. Purkinje cell axons were highly sensitive to stimulation during a specific developmental window 45 

(Fig. 1D ). Following stimulation at 7 or 8 days, Purkinje cell axons grew within primary sensory areas for head 

acceleration, the vestibular nuclei, as well as for water flow, the medial octavolateral nucleus (‘flow nucleus’; Fig. 1E ). 

Stimulation caused significantly more growth at 8 than at 6 or 9 days ( n=9 -10; t wo -way ANOVA, main effect of 

stimulation age, F 3,67 =5.00, p<0.01 ; Tukey posthoc tests of pairwise ages , 6v8 days: p<0.05, 8v9 days: p<0.01, all else ns ). 

Given low baseline innervation of the flow nucleus, stimulation -induced growth biased Purkinje cell projections there 50 

(mean fraction in flow nucleus: 7.6% after stimulation at 6, 14.5% at 7, 19.6% at 8, and 3.8% at 9 days). We conclude 

Purkinje cell projections are regulated by activity for a brief window early in the life history of a zebrafish. 

To augment plasticity, we stimulated Purkinje cells chronically for 48 hours throughout th e critical period. By the 

end of stimulation at 8 days and persisting until 12 days, stimulation dose -dependently increased the proportion of brains 

with Purkinje cell projections to the flow nucleus, from approximately 1/4 to 2/3 at a dose of 1 μM capsaicin (Fig. 1F ,55 

significant effect of dose (χ²(1)=22.62, p < 0.001) but not age (χ²(1)=2.73, ns ). Furthermore, by day 12, critical period 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Figure 1: Activity -dependent plasticity of Purkinje cell projections in zebrafish. (A) Schematic of the vertebrate cerebellar 

learning circuit and rendering of zebrafish circuit anatomy. ( B) Zebrafish cerebellum ( outlined ; 12 days) showing cytosolic TRPV1 

expression ( cyan ) in Purkinje cell somata and dendrites in the molecular layer (ml), as well as pan -neuronal nuclear jGCaMP7f 5

expression ( gray ). ( C) Calcium dynamics of cerebellar neurons grouped by TRPV1 expression during application of capsaicin (6 days ,

Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP; elavl3:H2B -jGCaMP7f )). ( D) Horizontal projections of traced Purkinje cell axons in representative 

genetic control ( left ) and capsaicin -exposed ( right ) brains. Depth -coded projections ( bottom ) show axons throughout the flow nucleus 

following stimulation (12 days). ( E) Length of Purkinje cell axons in flow nucleus ( top left ) and vestibular nuclei ( bottom left ) at 12 

days following 7 -hour capsaicin exposure at 6, 7, 8, or 9 days ( n=9 -10). Pie charts reflect relative length of projections to flow (purple) 10 

and vestibular nuclei (green) and are scaled by total length of projections. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01 by Tukey posttest after two -way 

ANOV A. ( F) Proportion of brains with flow nucleus innervation by Purkinje cells as a function of capsaicin dose, measured at end of 

stimulation (8 days, effect of dose, *** p<0.001) or at 12 days (effect of dose, ** p<0.01). Group sizes above bars. ( G) Length of 

Purkinje cell axons (mean ± SEM) in the flow nucleus ( F, **** p <0.0001) in stimulated and control fish ( n=8; 12 days). ( H) Length of 

Purkinje cell axons in the flow nucleus as a function of temperature during capsaicin stimulation (8 days). ( I) Schematic of behavioral 15 

assay with arena orbiting in register with infrared camera and backlight ( left ). Freely -swimming larvae were recorded in unsealed or 

sealed conditions, with attendant flow dynamics quantified using particle image velocimetry ( right ). Vectors convey flow horizontal 

velocity by orbit phase. ( J) Effect of prior Purkinje cell stimulation on change in swimming speed from baseline due to orbital motion 

in unsealed ( left , flow assay ) or sealed conditions ( right , vestibular assay ; 2 runs for each of 5 groups of 8 fish plotted by run, with 

overall mean). 20 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4

stimulation increased the length of Purkinje cell axons within the flow nucleus by an order of magnitude ( Fig. 1G , 76.0 

vs. 753.7 μm; n=8, t -test, t 14 =5.97, p<0.0001). To confirm capsaicin signaled via exogenous capsaicin receptor, we 

adjusted incubation temperature, which co -modulates channel conductance 28,29 , and found that warming could augment 

the effect of stimulation at day 8 ( Fig. 1H , n=4 -11; one -way ANOVA, effect of temp.: F 2,17 =5.52, p<0.05; Bonferroni: 28 

vs 32C, p<0.05; 28 vs. 25C, ns ). Elongated axons appeared immature with small, sparse boutons ( Supp. Fig. S1 ) and even 5

sporadically exhibited ectopic projections to the spinal cord, caudal hindbrain, and contralateral cerebellum ( Supp. Fig. 

S2 ). Finally, we observ ed thin ning of the molecular layer that comprises Purkinje cell dendrites, consistent with results in 

other models ( Supp. Fig. S3 )30,31 . Activity during the two -day critical period can therefore drastically remodel Purkinje 

cell anatomy, particularly their long -range projections to the brainstem. 

Growth of Purkinje cell axons in brainstem sensory structures corresponded to altered sensory responses . Because 10 

swimming is suppressed by inhibition of neuropil within the flow nucleus 32 , where GABAergic Purkinje cell axons 

heavily projected after stimulation , we designed a behavioral assay to compare swimming activity in response to flow and 

vestibular stimuli. While filming swimming behavior for posthoc image processing with machine learning, we applied 

orbital motion to achieve chronic variable acceleration and reversibly suppress ed water flow by damping surface waves, 

mitigating subsurface flow by an order of magnitude ( Fig 1 I; see Methods ). Following critical period Purkinje cell 15 

stimulation, fish were hyposensitive to water flow. Although motion with strong water flow reliably increased swimming 

speed in control fish at 12 days (+14.6%), it failed to alter swimming following Purkinje cell stimulation ( -1.1%; Fig. 1J ;

n=5 groups of 8 fish with 2 repetitions each, linear mixed effects model, F 1,17 =5.40, p<0.05). In contrast, Purkinje cell 

stimulation had little effect on responses to primarily vestibular stimuli (motion with damped waves), which consistently 

suppressed swimming ( -26.5% in controls vs. -22.7% after Purkinje cell stimulation, ns ). Therefore, Purkinje cell 20 

stimulation not only caused an order of magnitude increase in projections to the flow nucleus but also suppresse d

behavioral responses to water flow. 

The IO regulates experience -dependent plasticity of cerebellar projections 

Since cerebellar projections are labile during a critical period, and IO instructi ve inputs rely on those projections 25 

to transform plasticity into learning, we next examined the role of the IO in the critical period . Olivary neurons are key 

regulators of Purkinje cell activity and provide potent depolarization across vertebrates 33,34 . Direct chemogenetic 

stimulation of Purkinje cells supersedes olivary drive, so we instead tested whether IO modulates plasticity of Purkinje 

cell projections due to experience. Both the vestibular and flow -sensing systems are activated by motion, and we 

previously noted adaptation to early motion experience in zebrafish 35 , so we placed fish under chronic motion (CM) 30 

during the critical period (Fig. 2A ). 

Flow nucleus projections and behavioral flow responses were sensitive to motion experience, providing a 

foundation to study olivary regulation. In contrast to direct stimulation with capsaicin, CM had only modest effect on the 

length of Purkinje cell axons within the flow and vestibular nuclei by 12 days (+22% in flow, -23% in vestibular nuclei; 

Fig. 2B, Supp. Fig. S4 ). However, axons specifically within the flow nucleus were strikingly different after CM ( Fig. 2C -35 

E). They exhibited larger boutons that appeared spatially clustered after CM ( Fig. 2C,D ; n=5 -7; 1.51 vs 1.23 μm width for 

controls; t 10 =3.22, p<0.01) and were approximately half as dense ( Fig. 2E ; 57.1 vs 101.2 boutons per mm axon for 

controls; t 10 =2.49, p<0.05), indicators of axon maturity consistent with preferential pruning of small boutons ( Supp. Fig. 

S5 )36,37 . In contrast, axons within the vestibular nuclei exhibited no change to bouton morphology or density from CM 

(Fig. 2D -2E ; n=8; width: 1.34 vs 1.38 μm for controls; t 14 =0.73, ns ; density: 42.1 vs 42.6 boutons per mm axon for 40 

controls; t 14 =0.04, ns ). As with Purkinje cell stimulation, CM affected not only flow nucleus anatomy but also behavioral 

responses to flow ( Fig. 2F ). Specifically, CM prevented swim speed changes in the flow assay at 12 days (-19.0% vs. 

+14.6% for controls; n=5 groups of 8 fish with 2 repetitions each; Linear mixed effects model, F 1,17 =38.57, p<0.001), but 

had no significant effect in the vestibular assay ( -16.6% vs. -26.5% for controls; F 1,17 =3.42, ns ). We conclude early motion 

experience can drive matura tion of Purkinje cell projections to the flow nucleus as well as behavioral flow sensitivity. 45 

Experience -dependent plasticity of Purkinje cell projections was regulated by the IO. To test the necessity of IO 

for plasticity, we induced lesions of IO cells with a transgenic approach one day prior to CM . Specifically, fish express ed 

a chemosensitizer, nitroreductase, under an IO -specific promoter 38 , as well as fluorescently labeled Purkinje cells ( Fig. 

2G,H , Tg(hspGFFDMC28C+; UAS:βGi -epNTR -tagRFP+; aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP+; nacre -/-)). Notably, IO lesions 

prevented effects of CM, preventing the increase in bouton width and decrease in bouton density in the flow nucleus (Fig. 50 

2I ; n=5 -11; width: 1.27 vs 1.15 μm for controls; t 14 =1.68, ns ; density: 52.7 vs 42.1 boutons per mm axon for controls; 

t14 =0.74, ns ; Supp. Fig. S5 ). Furthermore, although CM failed to alter axon length in the intact system, IO lesions 

revealed a capacity of CM to induce axon growth, causing a three fold increase ( Fig. 2J , n=23 -24, 76.0 μm CM vs. 23.9 

μm for controls; t 45 =2.11, p<0.05). Effects of lesion were not systemic but pathway -specific, as Purkinje cells within 

individual brains were more likely to project to the flow nucleus if their candidate IO afferents, categorized by hemisphere 55 

assuming decussation, were more thoroughly lesioned ( Fig. 2K,L ; n=9, Wilcoxon signed -rank test, p<0.05). These 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

5

Figure 2: The IO regulates experience -dependent plasticity of Purkinje cell projections. (A) Fish were exposed to CM from 6 -8

days before evaluation at 12 days. ( B) Change in axon length (mean ± SEM) at 12 days in the flow nucleus ( pink ) and vestibular 

nuclei ( green ) from CM. ns by t -test. ( C) Representative maximum intensity projections of Purkinje cell axons in the flow nucleus at 

12 days with or without CM from 6 -8 days. (D, E ) Median bouton width ( D) and density ( E) on Purkinje cell axons in the flow 10 

nucleus ( left ) and vestibular nuclei ( right ) with or without CM (mean ± SEM). ( F) Effect o f CM from 6 -8 days on swimming speed 

change at 12 days in response to orbital motion in unsealed ( left ) or sealed conditions ( right ; 2 runs for each of 5 groups of 8 fish 

plotted by run, with overall mean; *** p<0.001). ( G) Horizontal maximum intensity projection of transgenic for lesioning IO prior to 

CM and Purkinje cell tracing, here expressing a fluorescent reporter revealing climbing fiber apposition to Purkinje cell som ata. ( H)

Representative, depth -coded projection of IO chemosensitizer expression (β Gi -epNTR -tagRFP) without ( top ) and with ( bottom )15 

metronidazole -mediated cell ablation (12 days). ( I, J ) Axonal morphology at 12 days after IO lesion at 5 days and CM from 6 -8 days. 

Median bouton width ( I, left , ns by t -test), bouton density ( I, right , ns), and total axon length ( J, * p<0.05) are plotted as mean ± SEM. 

n=23 -24 brains, of which 11 and 5 had axons for CM and controls, respectively. (K) Depth -coded representative micrograph of chance 

asymmetric IO lesion at 12 days. ( L,M) For brains with at least one Purkinje cell axon innervating the flow nu cleus, IO lesions were 

more thorough in the contralateral hemisphere, in terms of extant IO cells upstream of the flow nucleus projection ( L, * p<0.05, 20 

Wilcoxon signed -rank test). Logic of conditional plot ( M). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 6

results reveal a novel developmental function for the instructive IO, which typically orchestrates mature learning, to 

indirectly regulate wiring changes downstream of its cerebellar targets (Fig. 2M ). 

Early experience activates IO and targets to direct Purkinje cell projections 

To understand why CM drives maturation of Purkinje cell projections specifically to the flow nucleus and how 5

the IO regulates this process, we recorded motion responses throughout the brain using calcium imaging . Fish sense 

motion with multiple sensory modalities that can activate the olivocerebellar system and its target structures , but neural 

responses to coherent motion are rarely described as stimuli are often decomposed by modality . Specifically, i solated 

water flow is transduced by the neuroma st s of the mechanosensory lateral line and encoded in the flow nucleus, head 

acceleration is transduced by the vestibular endorgans that activate both the vestibular nuclei and IO, and visual motion 10 

activates the IO and putatively the vestibular nuclei (Fig. 3A )39 -44 , but the interaction of these brain areas during 

multimodal motion sens ing is unclear. To record neural responses across the brainstem while imposing naturalistic 

motion, which requires displacement of the fish to activate the vestibular system, we devised an approach to record 

calcium dynamics of cells moving precisely within the focal plane of a microscope. To achieve such precis ion , we 

mounted a voice coil actuator on a linear stage atop a kinematic mount to calibrate travel within the focal plane . This 15 

device, the μSled, is open -source and low -cost, enabling reproducible and programmable translation of samples for 

intravital imaging ( Fig. 3B,C , Supp. Fig. S6 & S7 and Methods for fabrication details and performance validation ). By

moving fish with freed tails under a multiphoton microscope, we could apply coherent sensation of motion in vestibular,

visual, and flow modalities , evidenced by deflection of a fluorescent neuromast (Fig. 3D ). 

Surprisingly, coherent motion strongly activated the IO and flow nucleus but not the vestibular nuclei . We 20 

imaged motion responses at 6 days in naïve fis h and observed both directionally tuned and bidirectional neurons in both 

the flow nucleus and IO (see Methods ). Of 265 flow nucleus cells imaged in one fish, 10.9 % exhibited suprat hre shold

responses to bot h fore and aft m otion, 20.4 % responded to fore motion only, and 3.8% responded to aft motion only, and

responsive cells in each category exhibited a mean correlation with stimulus predictors exceeding 0.49 (Fig. 3E,F).

Similarly, of 149 IO cells, 4.0% responded to both fore and aft motion, 12.8% responded to fore motion only, and 40.3%25 

responded to aft motion only, with mean correlation with stimul us p red ictors e xce eding 0.38 . In contrast, unlike in prior

experiments of unimodal, oscillating head acceleration45,46, none of the 46 vestibular nuclear cells recorded in the 

Purkinje cell terminal fields exhibited any suprathreshold response to for e or aft stepwise motion (Fig. 3 E bottom and 

3F). However, vestibular nuclear c ells d id act ivate strongly coincident with swimming behavior (Fig. 3F, bottom). These 

data suggest a potential explanation for IO-dependent maturation of Purkinje cell axons within the flow nucleus but not30 

vestibular nuclei following motion experience (Fig. 2D,E,I): coactivation of flow nucleus and IO cells may promote 

matu ration of intermedia ry Purkinje cell projections . To test this hypothesis, we decoupled flow experience from other 

mo dalities conveying motion. As expected, suppressing flow sensation by embedding the tail after imaging mitigated 

responses within the flow nucleus across each category of motion-responsive cells (Fig. 3F).

By interfering with flow sensation during CM, we identified coactivation of instructive inputs and targets as a35 

potential mechanism for plasticity. Before exposing fish t o CM during the critical period, at 5 days we lesioned lateral 

lin e neuromasts , creating ‘flow -blind ’ fish throughout the critical period 35 . Without a functional lateral line to activate 

the flow nucleus, CM failed to increase bouton width or decrease density of Purkinje cell axons within the flow nucleus 

(Fig. 3 G; n=9 -10; width: 1.35 vs 1.32 μm for controls; t 17 =0.31, ns ; density: 64.0 vs 67.5 boutons per mm axon for 

controls; t 17 =0.23, ns ). Both axonal features in the flow nucleus of flow -blind fish were comparable to those of axons in 40 

the vestibular nuclei, which was not activated by motion and where CM fails to induce plasticity ( compare to Fig. 2D,E ). 

Furthermore, CM of flow -blind fish caused a tendency to grow axons within the flow nucleus, similar to CM in fish after 

IO lesion as well as direct Purkinje cell stimulation ( n=19 -24; 79.2 vs 34.4 μm for controls; t 41 =1.69, ns ; data not 

shown). These data suggest experience -dependent maturation of Purkinje cell projections depends not only on IO 

activation but also on activity within target structures. 45 

Developmental plasticity can promote credit assignment 

The discovery that Purkinje cell projections are highly plastic reveals a potential strategy not for solving credit 

assignment directly but for building circuits in which local plasticity can assign credit. Unlike artificial networks trained 

by backpropagation, which can compute each synaptic change from the entire downstream circuit, biological synapses 50 

are modified by local rules using signals available at the synapse and so depend on downstream architecture to make 

those local changes beneficial 2. Accordingly, an instructive input to the cerebellum is thought to improve behavior 

because it specifically acts on Purkinje cells whose downstream function corresponds to that instruction’s tuning, an 

example of a widespread circuit motif for enabling credit assignment 3-5,47 . We propose an instructive input can construct 

the very circuit in which it later performs credit assignment, shaping downstream connectivity indirectly so local 55 

plasticity during learning can improve behavior. Specifically, o ur experiments suggest the IO could serve this dual 

purpose, as Purkinje cell axons matured within the flow nucleus only when both the upstream IO and downstream 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

5

Figure 3. Neural responses to motion implicate coactivation with IO in target-specific maturation. (A) Schematic of known

zebrafish brainstem encoding of modalities comprising natural motion . ( B) Rendering of μSled, a device for tunable translation of 

samples to optically record neuronal motion responses. (C) Translation of a fluorescent microbead using μSled on a multiphoton

microscope (top) used to calculate linear acceleration ( bottom ). (D) Fluorescent mechanosensory neuroma sts (Tg(brn3 c:GFP) ) in a10 

merged fluorescent and transmitted light micrograph (top ) and neurom ast deflec tion by the μSled . ( E) Pan -neuronal , nuclear -

localized calcium indic ator (gray) with brain region-specific regions of interest (yellow) used to measure motion responses.

Compara ble vestibular nuclear anatomy is also presented in a se cond brain in which Purkinje cell axons are additionally labeled

(cyan). (F) Calcium dynamics during μSled translation both fore (towards head) and aft (towards tail) within the flow nucleus, IO,

and vestibular nuclei as mean ± SEM. Dynamics are shown for ce lls uniquely sorted into res ponse type cat egories by correlation 15 

with stimulus -specific predictors (mean c orrela tion w ithin cat eg or ies shown ), and for the same flow nucleus res ponders before and 

after tail embedding to prevent water flow. *Since no vestibular nuclear cells exhibited sufficient responses, dynamics are depicted

for the 8 highest correlated cells within each category, as well as during periods of spontaneous swimming (bottom right). (G) Effect 

of ablating the mechanosensory lateral line on critical period CM -mediated axonal plasticity. Bouton width (top) and density in the

flow nucleus (bottom) exhibited significant effects of CM (see Fig. 2D, 2E) unless CM was applied in flow -blind fish after ablation of 20 

neurom asts (ns, t-test w ith Bonferroni correction, mean ± SEM). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 8

flow nucleus were activated by experience (see Figs. 2M, 3F, 3G ). This dependence of Purkinje cell development on 

structures both up - and downstream is reminiscent of the correlation -based, Hebbian plasticity that organizes developing 

sensory systems 22 , suggesting the IO could build IO -Purkinje -target correspondence by an analogous rule. 

To test whether developmental plasticity can construct circuits in which local plasticity suffices for credit 

assignment, we devised a computational model . Given that zebrafish use flow sensation and the cerebellum to control 5

turning 48,49, we tasked an olivocerebellar circuit with learning to move an agent about a plane by commanding two -

dimensional effectors ( Fig. 4A ). In order to learn, IO cells with precise directional preference (matrix Aio ) conveyed 

feedback about performance to instruct heterosynaptic plasticity at Purkinje cell motor inputs (matrix W1), constituting a 

canonical Marr -Albus -Ito ‘learning rule’ 50. However, the circuit was initially pseudorandomly connected and first relied 

on another form of plasticity, a Hebbian ‘wiring rule,’ by which the IO strengthened Purkinje cell projections to coactive 10 

targets (matrix W2, see Methods ). For the learning rule to improve behavior, that is for the circuit to perform credit 

assignment, IO error signals must be routed to Purkinje cells in which plasticity biases movement in the same direction. 

Whether the learning rule can improve behavior therefore depends on Purkinje cell projections established during 

development. 

For the learning rule to reliably improve performance, the connectivity must satisfy a constraint we derived 15 

analytically ( Appendix ). Although cerebellar anatomy exhibits a common motif enabling credit assignment, in which 

individual Purkinje cells bridge approximately matched instructions and downstream function, how connectivity impacts 

learning at population scale remains unknown. We show mathematically that for a cerebellar circuit to learn stably, there 

must tend to be directional similarity, or alignment, between IO tuning ( Aio ) and the effective output of Purkinje cells 

mediated by the downstream circuit; w ith this circuit architecture, effective output is captured by the product W3W2, but 20 

results generaliz e to any arbitrary downstream architecture. Specifically, the instructive input and effective output of the 

Purkinje cell population must be positively aligned along every dimension; formally, the matrix B=W3W2Aio must be 

positive definite, meaning all the eigenvalues of the symmetrized matrix, B+B T, are positive ( Appendix, conclusions 1 &

3). Thus, given a fixed wiring of a Purkinje cell to instructive inputs ( Aio ) and fixed function of candidate targets mediated 

by their own downstream co nnectivity (here, W3), any Purkinje cell wiring to targets ( W2) that satisfies the alignment 25 

condition ensures credit assignment. In other words, Purkinje cells here must influence movements in directions 

represented by their instructive inputs in aggregate, but each Purkinje cell need not exhibit positive alignment for the 

circuit to learn. Accordingly, a perfect alignment solution W2 = W 3TAio T could result from Hebbian plasticity ( Appendix, 

Part B ). These findings suggest a development rule would promote local credit assignment if it strengthens connections 

from Purkinje cells to targets contingent on coactivation of targets and IO inputs of the Purkinje cell. The theory wa s30 

confirmed in simulation of circuits with random architecture, as only positively aligned circuits learned the task ( Fig. 

4B,C; Supp. Fig. S 8A,B ) and the more aligned the circuit, the faster it learned ( Fig. 4D; Supp. Fig. S 8C). Therefore, 

simply by biasing the circuit toward positive alignment, developmental plasticity would tend to make future learning 

faster and the learning rule more viable. 

Finally, we asked how developmental plasticity and learning interact. We found that development of Purkinje cell 35 

projections can promote credit assignment, but only if the wiring rule is restricted to a critical period and slowed below 

the rate of learning. In these simulations, the wiring rule promoted positive alignment because the IO signaled feedback 

about movements generated by spontaneously active Purkinje cell targets, affording the requisite activity correlation (see 

Methods ), which is a distinct mechanism to achieve coactivation of IO and Purkinje cell targets from CM in experiments 

(Fig. 3 F). Initially, the wiring rule drove the circuit towards maximal alignment ( Fig. 4E , trial 0) , enabling performance 40 

improvement via the learning rule simply by pre -configuring Purkinje cell projections ( Fig. 4F , trial <750; Supp. Fig. 

S8D-G). Once learning began, however, the wiring rule became destructive. 

Specifically, in successfully aligned circuits the learning rule reduced the component of error predictable from 

Purkinje cell motor inputs, so the IO signal became decorrelated from other Purkinje cell inputs (Fig. 4G )51. Therefore, if 

the wiring rule persists after successful learning , the resulting loss of correlation between Purkinje cell target activity and 45 

IO activity degrades alignment ( Fig. 4E,F ). By contrast, when the two sites of plasticity were appropriately balanced , with 

the wiring rule operating at less than or equal to half the rate of the learning rule , this degradation became self -correcting ;

as performance fell, the return of predictable error restored the correlation between IO and Purkinje cell targets , and the 

slow wiring rule acted on that restored correlation to gradually recover alignment. Thus, a key benefit of slowing 

plasticity upon criti cal period closure is to preserve the projection patterns established during development as learning 50 

proceeds. Collectively, our experiments and computational analysis suggest instructive inputs can use developmental 

plasticity mechanisms to construct and adapt essential architecture for credit assignment. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

5

Figure 4. Cerebellar development can construct optimal architecture for learning. (A) Diagram of simulated cerebellar circuit. 

Purkinje cell inputs sparsely encode the direction of intended movement of an agent (see Methods ). IO neurons convey the error as a 

function of direction, with each IO neuron projecting to one Purkinje cell. Arrows in cells reflect either intended movement direction 

(in input layer), error tuning matrix Aio (in IO), or motor function (in target cells and output layer). ( B) Example connectivity patterns 10 

between Purkinje and target cells ( W2) with schematic of a single Purkinje cell ( top ) and matrices of full Purkinje cell layer ( bottom ). 

Color represents synaptic weights between inhibitory Purkinje and target cells. ( C) Effect of alignment from randomizing W2 on 

performance. For circuits with large positive alignment, learning converges such that all instructed directions are learned ( left ). At 

small positive or negative alignment, learning diverges such that the error increases with training ( right ). The vertical dashed line 

denotes the alignment in these arbitrary circuits at which both eigenvalues become positive. Because we impose W1 to be positive 15 

only, the circuit requires greater alignment to learn all directions (see Supp. Fig. S 8). ( D) Learning is faster with greater alignment, 

resulting in faster reduction of the mean squared error (MSE). (E,F ) The wiring rule acting at W2 initially drives the circuit to 

maximum alignment but eventually reduces alignment after learning at W1 begins at trial 0 ( E). Performance tracks alignment over the 

course of training, improving as the initially aligned circuit trains but then degrading as alignment is disrupted ( F). (G) Correlation of 

activity between an IO and target cell that share the same directional tuning, measured through the dot product. During devel opment 20 

(gray ) this pair is strongly positively correlated, but not after the learning rule activates and the circuit becomes driven by mo tor input 

(red , trials > 0). If the wiring rule remains highly plastic while the learning rule is active, once correlation of IO and target cell activity 

cease to reflect alignment, learning fails ( left ). 

25 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 10

Discussion :

Our results outline a developmental solution to credit assignment in the cerebellum. In canonical cerebellar 

learning, instructive inputs to Purkinje cells from the IO heterosynaptically modulate the strength of other inputs 52-24.

However, t hese modifications are thought to improve behavior only if the downstream influence of a Purkinje cell is 

aligned with the instruction conveyed to it by the IO 7,10,11 . How the cerebellum establishes this alignment between the 5

plasticity and output of its cells has been a mystery 55 . Our experimental and modeling results reveal that the developing 

cerebellum can achieve architecture for local credit assignment when developmental plasticity, orchestrated by 

experience -dependent activity, modifies Purkinje cell efferent connectivity such that downstream function becomes 

aligned with instruction. This alignment is required of the population but not single cells , such that a misaligned Purkinje 

cell that modulates synaptic weights counterproductively during learning is outweighed by the a ligned majority. Notably, 10 

this biological mechanism approximates backpropagation of errors from machine learning while inverting its logic. 

Backpropagation computes synaptic changes tailored to an arbitrary downstream network 56,57 ; here, error is assigned 

without knowledge of the downstream network by IO inputs of fixed tuning and routing, and instead the loss landscape 

becomes shaped around those instructions during development. In other words , by modifying downstream connectivity 

during development, instructive inputs can alter the function of target cells to accommodate learning through a simple, 15 

local plasticity rule. 

Cerebellar developmental plasticity parallels activity -dependent wiring in sensory systems, where patterned 

activity can construct labelled lines across layers and regions 22 ,58,5 9. In contrast to sensory system development, though, 

experience -dependent plasticity of the cerebellum was regulated by a dedicated instructive input. Purkinje cell 

connectivity is known to be affected by activity and developmental experience 24,30,31,60, but less established is how these 20 

processes regulate the registration across Purkinje cells of IO instruction and target function. Here, Purkinje cell activati on 

drove broad innervation of less saturated targets, exuberant growth that may provide a substrate for selective pruning 61 .

The anatomical specialization of IO innervation, the climbing fiber, induces pronounced depolarization that drives 

Purkinje cell plasticity, even in developing zebrafish 34, which may afford robust signaling for feedforward plasticity. The 

early arrival of developing climbing fibers relative to other Purkinje cell inputs 62,63 could afford a privileged window to 25 

shape efferent connectivity in the nascent circuit. A winner -takes -all competition which prunes less active climbing fibers 

may complementarily preserve the input best suited to regulate downstream wiring and thereby promote credit 

assignmen t60 . Consistently, climbing f iber responses are present within the first days of Purkinje cell differentiation in 

zebrafish, climbing fiber pruning accompanies the tuning refinement we observe across the critical period, and the IO is 

required for the emergence of functional cerebella r output in developing mammals64-66. Critical period closure may mark a 30 

transition in the plasticity the IO most prominently induces, from a Hebbian -like rule that strengthens connections 

between co -active partners across developing brain regions to the mature, anti -Hebbian plasticity that supports cerebellar 

learning. 

Confining plasticity to a brief critical period carries profound benefit. Simulations revealed a computational cost 

of leaving the critical period open by maintaining highly plastic projections of Purkinje cell s amidst learning. If 35 

developmental plasticity continued at high rates , it corrupt ed the very architecture it previously established that made 

learning possible, so closing the critical period preserves downstream architecture and renders learning robust. In turn, it 

becomes clear w hy the plastic window opens when it does in the context of the animal's ecology and life history. The 

critical period falls during the first few days of active hunting, when larval zebrafish, like other teleosts entering extern al 

feeding, face intense mortality risk from predation and starvation 67-70. Because behavior at this stage bears so directly on 40 

feeding success and predator evasion, the short -term benefits of rapid, persistent remodeling likely outweigh any long -

term costs 71,72. Consistently, the zebrafish cerebellum assembles rapidly and regulates learning and locomotion within one 

week of fertilization, and olivary sensory tuning emerges early, supplying the physiological preconditions for the 

plasticity we describe 48,64,73-77. The window therefore opens once the basic circuit is assembled but while behavioral 

consequences for fitness remain high, then closes before persistent remodeling might degrade the acquired architecture .45 

Like the experience -dependent plasticity that tunes sensory circuits to the statistics of the sensed world, including when 

those statistics are atypical 78,7 9, this mechanism adapts the cerebellum and flow processing to the animal's early motion 

experience. Purkinje cell projections to the flow nucleus have been described on ly rar ely 80, which may reflect the 

impoverished experience of typical laboratory rearing in stagnant water 35.

To establish suitable connectivity for credit assignment, the mechanism investigated relies on activity correlations 50 

that reflect the causal relationship between action and sensory feedback. The sensorimotor loop here was closed by 

olivary encoding of reafference, the sensory feedback an animal generates through its motor output. Through reafference, 

active targets of Pu rkinje cells became correlated with olivary cells whose sensory tuning was aligned with the targets’ 

ultimate motor consequence. In other words, developmental plasticity facilitated subsequent motor learning in simulations 

because the loop conveyed to Purk inje cells how downstream connections function in sensory space. In this way, a 55 

solution to credit assignment arises from registration of sensory feedback with motor function, reflecting causality at the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11

level of individual hidden layer neurons. In experiments, where the sensory experience was imposed and not reafferent, 

activity also drove circuit remodeling. Motion activated both the IO and flow nucleus, and flow sensory blockade 

mitigated flow nucleus r esponses as well as plasticity. A parsimonious interpretation is that CM co -opted a typical 

developmental process, artificially coactivating the IO and flow nucleus targets to bias projections. If IO activation instea d

conveys reafference such that correla tions across regions become grounded in the physics of the body and the 5

organization of sensory and motor maps, a circuit could achieve credit assignment while accommodating individually 

variable motor plants or sensorimotor maps. Critically, no purely internal scheme can originate this registration; climbing -

fiber collaterals to the cerebellar nuclei, for example, are strongest during development and likely regulate circuit 

formation 81,82, but they could only serve to register Purkinje efferents with function -matched targets if the olivonuclear 

projection was itself already registered, relocating rather than resolving the problem. 10 

What local plasticity rule could mediate the empirical effects of early -life experience and simulated 

developmental wiring? We propose a Hebbian -like, correlation -based rule of the kind that drives activity -dependent 

wiring throughout the developing brain 22,59 ,83 , operating here to link neurons of common directionality in task space, both 

in terms of IO sensory tuning and efferent neuron function. Such co -tuning is well documented in the mature cerebellum, 

including in oculomotor regions where IO cells and Purkinje cell targets share directionality during smooth pursuit and 15 

saccade 84-86. Given that prominent co -tuned cerebellar organization emerges during development in our simulations, we 

speculate this plasticity rule may not only afford adaptation to experience but also construct canonical cerebellar 

architecture; operating solely on naturally tuned responses during typical mammalian development, this rule could build 

the aligned IO –efferent organization of circuits such as the oculomotor vermis. Organizing projections by aligned motor 

function in this way also group ed cerebellar outpu t into synergies (Fig. 4B ), a developmental route for solving a central 20 

problem of motor coordination 87. This developmental plasticity rule may bridge reafferent delays so IO activity can 

promote appropriate connectivity downstream, as the cerebellum can precisely regulate plasticity using long -latency 

feedback 88,8 9 and immature circuits tend to employ broad integration windows driving potentiation with negative lags 90 -93 .

Consistent with broad temporal integration for early wiring , immature IO neurons low -pass filter excitatory synaptic 

input 94.25 

Beyond realizing feedback -guided wiring in a biological circuit, obviating backpropagation's implausible weight 

transport 2,95, this developmental strategy affords economy of wiring. Our development mechanism and feedback 

alignment, the algorithm first proposed to circumvent weight transport using feedback, both serve to align weight updates 

with the true loss gradient. However, feedback alignment uses distinct feedback pathways to train multiple layers 

simultaneously, whereas this developmental mechanism reuses a single feedback pathway to train both layers 30 

sequentially. Plasticity at both sites for development and learning need not be sequenced, as the critical period could 

remain open without stifling learning if developmental plasticity was slow relative to the canonical cerebellar learning 

mechanism . Regardless, preconfiguring downstream connectivity during development restricted learning -related plasticity 

to a single layer, which accelerated convergence in our simulations consistent with networks trained using feedback 

alignment 96.35 

Our formalization implements developmental plasticity specifically in the projections of Purkinje cells, which 

adapt to fixed wiring of IO input and connectivity further downstream. Mathematically, the alignment condition could 

equally be met by adjusting IO input or Purkin je target function, but only the Purkinje cell efferent synapses have access 

to both IO and target cell activity, so a local, Hebbian -like rule can assemble the network only there. Furthermore, the 

octavolateral and vestibular targets of Purkinje cells are evolutionarily ancient brainstem structures closely tied to the 40 

origin of the cerebellum 14,25, so cerebellar projections plausibly evolved and may develop to engage established 

downstream circuits rather than the reverse. 

The formalization also relies on deliberately simple plasticity rules, chosen to prove sufficiency of learning. While 

the nature of the signal encoded by the mature climbing fiber is still intensively studied 97-100, here we adopted the 

canonical error -based cerebellar rule for its convergence and analytical tractability, as success is readily quantified. Our 45 

simulations also assumed linear Purkinje cell responses for simplicity, consistent with their high basal firing rates, and we 

prove that for linear networks a positive alignment between instructive input and Purkinje cell effective output is 

sufficient for successful learning. The result extends to nonlinear networks ( Appendix , conclusion 2 ), but alignment for 

these networks must be exact because the network's greater flexibility necessitates stronger constraint on the pre -trained 

downstream layer. 50 

The credit assignment problem arises for any deep network in which local synaptic changes must serve global 

performance, and it remains the central obstacle to understanding learning in biological networks 2. Error backpropagation, 

sufficient for artificial systems, cannot be implemented by the brain, and the schemes proposed to solve credit assignment 

biologically establish plausibility without an empirically identified substrate. Here we identify such a mec hanism in 

vertebrate development, in which instructive inputs reinforce suitable downstream architecture for subsequent credit 55 

assignment. Learning with dedicated instructive inputs is not peculiar to the cerebellum, and developmental regulation of 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12

downstream connectivity could plausibly foster alignment across learning mechanisms and circuits, potentially including 

dendritic plateau potential -instructed plasticity in hippocampus and neocortex 101 -103 . A single developmental mechanism 

could afford representational flexibility while also preconfiguring networks for credit assignment through precise routing 

of instructive inputs among populations of heterogeneous function. Together, these results reinfor ce the notion that 

training neural networks, both biological and artificial, requires mechanisms to not only guide local plasticity but also 5

instantiate architecture for its viable expression 104.

Methods: 

Animals 10 

Zebrafish husbandry 

Zebrafish (Danio rerio ) embryos were naturally spawned, collected, and maintained in standard E3 medium (0.30 M 

NaCl, 0.01 M KCl, 0.03 M CaCl₂, 0.02 M MgSO₄, pH 7.0) refreshed daily to maintain water quality. Fish without inflated 

swim bladders by 4 days, or days post -fertilization ( dpf ), were excluded from all experiments. Embryos and larvae were 

housed at 28°C under a 14 -hr light / 10 -hr dark cycle at densities of 20 -40 fish per 100 -mm Petri dish. Fish were 15 

transferred to 150 mL of fresh E3 at 8 dpf and fed a commercially available powdered fry diet daily. All experiments were 

performed in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the 

College of Letters a nd Science at the University of Wisconsin -Madison. 

Transgenic lines 20 

All animals were homozygous for the nacre mutation, which impairs the mitfa gene required for melanophore formation, 

resulting in transparent skin that facilitates optical access to the brain 10 5. For imaging Purkinje cells, unless otherwise 

indicated, experimental animals were homozygous for Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP) and heterozygous for Tg(elavl3:H2B -

jGCaMP7f )106 . The Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP) line expresses rat TRPV1 selectively in all cerebellar Purkinje cells, 

enabling targeted chemogenetic activation via bath application of capsaicin 27. Tg(elavl3:H2B -jGCaMP7f) was chosen for 25 

pan -neuronal expression of genetically encoded calcium indicator with nuclear localization, which streamlines cell 

segmentation. Genotypes were confirmed by fluorescence at 5 dpf. For ION lesions, we used Tg(hspGFFDMC28C) , a 

Gal4 driver line with specificity for the inferior olive 38 . This line was crossed with Tg(UAS:βGi -epNTR -tagRFP) to 

express an enhanced -potency nitroreductase (epNTR), allowing inducible chemogenetic ablation of climbing fiber 

cerebellar inputs upon metronidazole exposure 107. Lesion -study animals were offspring from an incross of 30 

hspGFFDMC28C; UAS:βGi -epNTR -tagRFP; aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP. 

Chronic motion (CM) 

Fish were visually screened at 5 dpf for expression of Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP) and Tg(elavl3:H2B -jGCaMP7f) . Then 

at 6 dpf, they were randomly assigned to one of four conditions: (1) E3 medium + stagnant water, (2) E3 medium + CM, 35 

(3) capsaicin + stagnant water, or (4) capsaicin + CM. Capsaicin (1 μM; final DMSO <0.05%) was delivered by 

immersion in 25 mL of solution in 100 -mm Petri dishes; vehicle -only controls were handled identically, and all solutions 

were refreshed after 24 hr. Mechanical stimulation was provided by a tilting shaker -incubator oscillating ±7° at 0.33 Hz 

(Incubator Shaker II, Boekel). In a subset of CM -exposed fish (6/19 in the 12 dpf study), an orbital shaker in an incubator 

was instead used (Labline 3520, 60 rpm , 3/4” circular path). Measures of axon length, bouton density, and bouton size did 40 

not differ between flow conditions (p > 0.15 for all comparisons) and results were pooled. All groups were maintained in 

the same incubator at ~28°C before and after 48 hr treatment (6 -8 dpf), transferred to fresh E3 medium after CM and fed 

daily until ima ging. 

Light Sheet Microscopy 45 

Purkinje cell anatomy was visualized using a lab built Flamingo light sheet fluorescence microscope being developed and

maintained by the Huisken and Eliceiri groups at the Morgridge Institute for Research equipped with a Nikon 16x/0.8 

detection lens with a 400mm tube lens for 32x magnification. Fish were vertically mounted in 2% low -melting point 

agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific 26520) within glass capillaries (1.0/1 .5 mm) by retracting a plunger into the capillary. 

After agarose solidification, samples were dispensed into an E3 -filled chamber and positioned just outside the capillary in 50 

the optical path for imaging 108. Z stacks were acquired using a 561 nm laser to excite TRPV1 -tagRFP and a 488 nm laser 

to excite nuclear -localized jGCaMP7f. A T -SPIM configuration was used for the microscope with two opposing 

illumination arms and a single orthogonal detection arm. Imaging was performed at 12 dpf unless otherwise specified, a 

stage at which fish maintain optical transparency while all owing assessment of prolonged treatment effects on Purkinje 

cell anatomy. 55 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 13

Axon Tracing 

Length quantification 

Axonal lengths were manually traced and regions defined in Fiji by experimenters blinded to experimental group using 

Simple Neurite Tracer (SNT), an ImageJ plugin for semi -automated tracing of neuronal processes in three -dimensional 

image stacks 109,110 . Tracing was performed on z -stacks acquired with light sheet microscopy. Each axon was traced in 5

three dimensions to its visible terminal point, and only clearly distinguishable axons were included. Flow nucleus (medial 

octavolateral nucleus ) innervation lengths were quantified by summing traced axon segments within flow boundaries as 

defined in the mapzebrain atlas 111; the region had a rostral boundary of the rostral extreme of the hindbrain and was 

caudally bounded by the white matter tract labeled “Neuropil Region 2” in the Z -Brain atlas 11 2. The dorsal -ventral 

boundary extended from the dorsal brain surface to the ventral edge of the corpus cerebelli. Axon segments below this 10 

limit were excluded. Laterally, the region encompassed the lateral three -fourths of the brain at the dorsal extreme, tapering 

to the lateral one -third at the ventral extreme. Vestibular nuclei axon lengths were quantified by summing traced segments 

within the lateral and tangential vestibular nuclei, defined as lateral to Neuropil Region 3 (Z -Brain atlas) extending from 

the dorsal limit of the tangential vestibular nuclei to the ventral extreme of the spinal backfill vestibular population. The 

rostral bound ary was set caudal to a point one Mauthner cell body width rostral to the Mauthner cell itself. 15 

Bouton quantification 

Putative boutons on Purkinje cell axons were first identified as bright swellings of the local axon. Swelling widths were 

measured in Fiji on image stacks of standardized brightness using the ROI Manager tool to draw a chord in the plane with 

widest swelli ng at the widest point orthogonal to the axon at that location 109. To account for differences in axon labeling 20 

and width, after swelling measurements those exceeding a width threshold of one pixel greater than the mean axon 

diameter (949 nm) were classified as boutons. Then, boutons were counted only on axons previously marked in Simple 

Neurite Tracer (SNT) reconst ructions to ensure correspondence with axonal length measurements. All tracings were 

performed blind to treatment. 

25 

Behavioral Analysis 

Behavioral assay 

Behavioral assays were conducted on 12 dpf fish with or without CM from 6 -8 dpf. Experiments were carried out on 

freely swimming zebrafish during the light phase of the 14:10 hr light/dark cycle. Behavior was recorded at 105 frames 

per second using a custo m-built apparatus consisting of an orbital shaker (Labline 3520, 60 rpm, 19 mm circular path) and 30 

an overhead infrared digital camera (BFS -U3 -162SM, FLIR) mounted on the moving platform to maintain a stable top -

down view. Illumination was provided by a 5W, 940 nm infrared LED backlight (LED World) beneath the dish and an 

aspheric condenser lens to focu s illumination (Thorlabs, ACL7560U -B, Ø75mm, F=60mm, NA=0.61), plus an overhead 

visible LED. Eight fish were recorded simultaneously in 60 -mm diameter Petri dishes containing 42 mL of E3. Dishes 

were filled to maximum capacity with dish lids placed directl y atop the water surface, sealing the dish without air bubbles. 35 

Following a 1 -min acclimation, two 60 -s recordings were obtained under static conditions, followed by a 1 -min 

acclimation and two recordings with the shaker active ( -flow). The lid was then removed to allow surface wave formation, 

and two additional record ings were obtained after a 1 -min acclimation (+flow). This sequence was repeated for five 

rounds, alternating treatment groups within each round, with E3 replaced between rounds. 

40 

Behavioral tracking 

Larval behavior was analyzed using Social LEAP Estimates Animal Poses (SLEAP), an open -source, deep -learning -based 

framework for multi -animal tracking 11 3. A top -down network model was trained on 233 manually labeled frames with 

tracking focused on three anatomical landmarks: the caudal edge of the swim bladder and the rostral -most point of each 

eye. Behavioral metrics were extracted from tracked coordinate s using custom MATLAB scripts, available on request, to 45 

low -pass filter paths to disentangle active swimming from shaker -frequency sloshing ( Supp. Fig. S 9). 

Particle image velocimetry 

To quantify water motion in the +flow and –flow behavioral conditions, the medium was seeded with tracer particles (d50 

= 10 μm, specific gravity = 1.1; 110P8, Potter Industries) and illuminated with a continuous -wave laser diode expanded 50 

into a planar sheet using cylindrical optics (https://www.instructables.com/Low -Cost -PIV -System/). Image pairs were 

acquired on the orbital shaking behavioral rig and analyzed with PIVlab 114. Spurious vectors were removed by applying a 

local spatiotemporal median filter with replacement. 

Lesion Experiments 55 

ION lesion 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14

Fish of genotype hspGFFDMC28C; UAS:βGi -epNTR -tagRFP; aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP were screened at 5 dpf and treated 

with 10 mM Metronidazole for 24 hr 38 ,107. Fish were washed in fresh E3 before experiencing CM from 6 -8 dpf (or 

stagnation for genetic controls). Lesion efficacy was confirmed at 12 dpf using light sheet microscopy to examine ION 

somata, and Purkinje cell axonal lengths and boutons were quantifie d thereafter. Unlesioned controls were not traced due 

to additional fibers labeled by Tg(hspGFFDMC28C) that obscured Purkinje cell -specific tracing. 5

Lateral line ablation 

Fish of genotype aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP; elavl3:H2B -jGCaMP7 f underwent lateral line ablation at 5 dpf by immersion in 

50 μM copper sulfate for 60 min at room temperature, as previously 35. After thorough washing in fresh E3, fish recovered 

for 24 h and then experienced CM from 6 -8 dpf, then at 12 dpf imaging was performed to assess Purkinje cell anatomy. 10 

Calcium Imaging 

Capsaicin response 

Fish of genotype aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP; el av l3:H2B -jGCaMP7f were imaged at 28.5°C during the light phase of the 

14:10 h light/dark cycle using a Flamingo light sheet microscope. Baseline activity was recorded in E3 medium before 15 

exchanging the chamber medium for a 1 μM capsaicin solution in E3. Image sequences were acquired at 4.982 fps, with 

64 frames collected at the start of each 45 s interval. Composite RFP/GCaMP images were generated to classify cells as 

RFP -positive (Purkinj e cell) or RFP -negative (non -Purkinje cell) in the cerebellum. Time series were motion -corrected for 

lateral drift using the TurboReg plugin for ImageJ, applying a translation transformation based on a template maximum -

intensity projection of stable frames 115. Nuclear regions of interest (ROIs) were segmented using the EfficientViSAM -l2 20 

implementation of the Segment Anything Model (SAM) plugin to obtain closely fitted cell boundaries 116. Fluorescence 

traces were then extracted for each ROI, and ΔF/F was calculated by normalizing fluorescence changes to the baseline 

mean ( F₀ ) with custom code in MAT LAB .

Motion responses with μSled 25 

Measuring responses to naturalistic motion requires moving the fish in order to stimulate the vestibular system, previously 

accomplished by moving either specimen alone or an entire microscope 40, 117, alongside visual and lateral -line systems. We 

translated larvae within the imaging plane during calcium imaging using a custom, programmable sled (μSled, see Supp. 

Fig. S6 for fabrication details). Translating the fish out of focus would change fluorescence for optical rather than 

physiological reasons, so we designed the μSled for tunable translation direction in order to travel precisely within the 30 

imaging plane. In -plane linear translation across the travel range was validated by imaging fluorescent microbeads ( Supp. 

Fig. S7 ). The device uses a voice -coil actuator (VC125, Thorlabs) to drive a precision linear rail (BWU25 -75; IKO, 

Japan) over a horizontal distance up to 10 mm but typically within a 200 –500 μm range, with a light extension spring 

providing a centering force alo ng the motion axis. A customized kinematic pitch/yaw mount (KPY1, Thorlabs) allowed 

fine adjustment of the orientation of the m ounted larva, and an adjustable three -point mount (fine -thread M3 × 0.20 35 

screws in threaded bushings, F3SS15/F3SSN1P, Thorlabs, contacting hardened seats held by stiff springs) maintained 

precise Z -axis positioning across the full travel range. The assembly was built into a two -part 3D -printed base ( Supp. Fig. 

S6 ) permitting precise X –Z and Y –Z adjustment relative to the microscope, with voice -coil centering set by another 

kinematic mount (KMS, Thorlabs). Drive voltages were generated in the microscope's Prairie View software and routed to 

a custom OPA541 -based am plifier (Forwar d Scientific). 40 

We imaged on a two -photon microscope (Bruker Ultima 2PPlus) in resonant -scanning mode, because two -photon 

excitation uses infrared light invisible to the fish, which allowed the visual environment to be controlled independent ly of 

imaging using an overhead red LED. Single planes were acquired sequentially, focused on the flow nucleus, vestibular 

nuclei, and inferior olive, identified anatomically using the pan -neuronal nuclear reporter ( ela vl3 :H2B -jGCaMP7f , as for 45 

light -sheet imaging) with reference to the mapzebrain and Z -Brain atlases 111,112. Lateral and tangential vestibular nuclei

were bounded as in Axon Tracing. Larvae were mounted horizontally in agarose, with agarose surrounding the tail excised 

to form a 5 mm -wide channel while the head remained embedded, allowing water to flow over the tail during motion. 

Later, to mitigate visual or lateral line contributions to the motion response, the tail was re -embedded in agarose to 

suppress water flow or the LED was removed, respectively. Flow ove r the tail was con firme d b y imaging bending of free d50 

mechanos ensory neuromasts of the lateral line in the brn3c:GFP line. For calcium imaging, fluorescence was measured at 

each stimulus position and ΔF/F computed against a position -specific baseline rather than a single global baseline to 

accommodate field nonuniformity. Motion correction, ROI segmentation, and ΔF/F calculation otherwise followed the 

calcium -imaging pipeline described for light sheet microscopy. Per -cell responses were averaged across stimulus 

repetitions (5 –10 trials) following causal Butterworth filtering in MAT LAB.55 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

To identify motion -responsive cells, stimulus regressors were generated by representing each fore and aft stepwise 

translation as delta functions at stimulus onset and convolving these events with a biexponential kernel (rise τ=0.6 s; 

decay τ=2 s). These parameters were selected to approximate the prolonged calcium transients observed experimentally, 

which substantially outlasted the intrinsic response kinetics expected for nuclear -localized jGCaMP7f. Separate predictors 

were constructed for fo re -responsive, aft -responsive, and bidirectional (fore plus aft) response profiles. For each ROI, the 5

correlation of trial -averaged ΔF/F waveform with each predictor was computed, and cells with a correlation coefficient 

exceeding 0.3 were classified as responsive. This threshold was selected empirically because it robustly separated 

apparent stimulus -responsive cells from baseline fluctuations and was applied uniformly across regions and conditions. 

Each cell was assigned exclusively to the response category exhibiting its strongest positive correlation. For visualization 

and population analyses, ΔF/F traces were averaged across all responsive cells within each anatomical region and 10 

response category per fish.

Supervised Learning Model 

Model construction 

We implemented 4 Purkinje cell targets (T) projecting according to matrix W3 to 2 output cells , corresponding to the two 15 

orthogonal dimensions in the movement plane (0:180° and 90:270°). We then added 8 Purkinje cells (P) that synapse onto 

the target cells (T), with each Purkinje cell receiving one IO input tuned to a specific direction in the plane (i.e., 0°, 45 °, 

90°, 135° , 180°, 225°, 270°, and 315° )10, defined in the matrix Aio with dimensionality NxP, where N is the number of 

Purkinje cells and P is the dimensionality of the output layer . Finally, as we explain later in this section, we added a 

Purkinje cell input layer representing cerebellar granule cells (g) that sparsely encoded motor commands 118. Both the 20 

olivary input weights, Aio , and the target -to -output weights, W3, were held fixed. The model therefore contained two 

plastic weight matrices, each regulated by the IO: the Purkinje -to -target weights W2, established during development by 

the 'wiring rule,’ and the granule -to -Purkinje weights W1, modified during mature learning by the 'learning rule.’ 

Circuit maturation 25 

During development, granule cells in the model were inactive, and activity in the target cells was drawn from a normal 

distribution, which in turn generated movement. Because olivary tuning ( Aio ) is fixed and behavioral output is produced 

by target cells through W3, driving target cell activity randomly and defining IO activity from the resulting output (below) 

produces correlation between IO cells and target cells with directionally similar sensory tuning and motor function, 

respectively. This regime reflects an alternate mechanism intended to capture the activity correlations observed in 30 

zebrafish when IO neurons and putative Purkinje cell targets are co -activated by sensory experience. 

ION activity was defined as taking values 1, –1, or 0 according to a threshold function: 

𝐼𝑂 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = {

1, if 𝑎 𝑖 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑦 (𝑡 ) > 𝜃 

−1, if 𝑎 𝑖 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑦 (𝑡 ) < −𝜃 

0, otherwise 

where  𝑦 = 𝑊 3𝑇 ,

 is a threshold value and  𝑎 𝑖  is the ith column of the Aio matrix. This piecewise function was used to 35 

approximate the low frequency activity of IO cells . However, the model performed as robustly when using a simpler 

linear equation whereby  𝐼𝑂 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝑎 𝑖 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑦 (𝑡 ). Negative values for IO neurons represent below baseline activity values 

(Herzfeld et al ., 2015 ). Synaptic weight changes between P urkinje and target cells followed a Hebbian rule: 

𝑊 ̇2 = − [ 𝑇 ⃗ ⋅ 𝐼𝑂 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ]+

with the additional normalization such that each row of W2 was divided by its maximum. Effectively, this learning rule 40 

drove positive correlation of the tuning of the IO and target cells linked by Purkinje cells in order to set  𝑊 2 ≈ 𝑊 3

> 𝑇

𝐴 𝑇  (see 

Appendix Part B ). This Hebbian developmental rule is compatible with our experimental finding that maturation of 

Purkinje cell projections requires activation of the IO and the acquired target, and with the established role of correlated 

activity in wiring developing circu its 59,119.

45 

Mature activity and learning 

After an initial phase of circuit development, activity in the target cells became driven by P urkinje cell input which in turn 

was driven by g ranule cell input such that, 

𝑇 ⃗ (𝑡 ) = 𝑡 𝑏𝑙 + 𝑊 2𝑊 1𝑔 (𝑡 )

where tbl is the baseline activity of target cells to ensure their firing remained positive and could vary above and below 50 

baseline values.  𝑔  is the granule cell activity where the 2xN g matrix, Ag, defines the direction of intended movement in 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

which each granule cell is active. N g is the number of granule cells. Then, given a movement instruction  𝑚 ̂⃗⃗ (𝑡 ), and 

defining  𝑛 = 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝐴 𝑔 

> 𝑇

𝑚 ̂⃗⃗ (𝑡 )):

𝑔 (𝑛 ) = A𝑔 

> 𝑛 𝑇

⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑚 ̂⃗⃗ (𝑡 )

and all other granule cells = 0. (For example, if Ng=180, each granule cell was only active for instructions within 1 degree 

of its peak tuning response). 5

We adopted the canonical error -based formulation in which mature IO activity encodes the difference between desired and 

actual output 47,120 . Error in the movement was defined as: 

𝜖 (𝑡 ) = 𝑚 ̂⃗⃗ (𝑡 ) − 𝑦 (𝑡 )

and IO activity post development was: 10 

𝐼𝑂 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = {

1, if 𝑎 𝑖 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝜖 (𝑡 ) > 𝜃 𝜖 

−1, if 𝑎 𝑖 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝜖 (𝑡 ) < −𝜃 𝜖 

0, otherwise 

Learning from error at the granule -Purkinje cell synapses followed an anti -Hebbian rule: 

𝑊 ̇1 = 𝜂 [−(𝐼𝑂 )⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ⋅ 𝑔 𝑇 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ ]+

Effectively, this learning rule produces anti -correlate d tuning of the granule and IO cell inputs to a Purkinje cell .15 

Effective weight 

To measure the effect of the motor command to propagate through the network and produce both a matching movement in 

the desired direction and no movement in the direction orthogonal to the desired direction (the null direction), we 

calculated the following :

𝑓 𝑖 (𝑝𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 ) = −𝑎 𝐺  

> 𝑖 𝑇

⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑊 3𝑊 2𝑤 1

> 𝑖

⃗⃗⃗⃗20 

𝑓 𝑖 (𝑛𝑢𝑙𝑙 ) = ∑ −𝑎 𝐺 

> ⊥𝑇

⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ 𝑊 3𝑊 2𝑤 1

> 𝑖

⃗⃗⃗⃗

> ⊥

where  𝐴 𝐺  

> ⊥

are the directions orthogonal to  𝐴 𝐺  

> 𝑖

.

Measuring alignment 

As we show in the Appendix , the key parameter for this network to learn any task is that both eigen values of the 25 

symmetrized matrix, B, are positive. In our simulations, we used the Frobenius inner product of  𝑊 2 with  𝑊 3

> 𝑇

𝐴 𝑇  as a 

measure for alignment as this value provides the normalized sum of the eigen values and is therefore a good proxy of 

alignment. 

Statistical Analysis 30 

All statistical analyses were performed in MAT LAB. For two -group comparisons of continuous measures ( e.g ., axon 

length, bouton width, bouton density), two -tailed Student's t -tests were used. For comparisons across more than two 

groups with a single factor ( e.g ., stimulation age, temperature), one -way ANOVA was used followed by Bonferroni -

corrected post -hoc tests for pairwise comparisons. For experiments with two crossed factors ( e.g ., CM × lesion condition), 

two -way ANOVA was used to assess main effects and interactions. For non -parametric paired comparis ons (namely, 35 

within -brain laterality of ION lesion completeness), the Wilcoxon signed -rank test was used. Behavioral data in which 

repeated measurements were obtained from groups of fish across rounds were analyzed with linear mixed -effects models 

to account for the ne sted structure of repeated observations within groups, with fixed effects of treatment condition and 

stimulus type, and significance was assessed by F -tests on fixed effects. For binary outcomes ( e.g. , presence of MON 

innervation), logistic regression was used (generalized linear model with binomial distribution and logit link function, 40 

implemented with fitglm). Predictors were included as main effects and their interaction; significance of each term was 

assessed by likelihood -ratio χ² tests comparing the full model to a reduced model lacking that term. Sample sizes ( n) refer 

to individual brains for anatomical measures and to groups of simultaneously evaluated fish for behavioral assays. Where 

data are plotted as bar graphs, values represent mean ± SEM unless otherwise noted. Significance thresholds are denoted 

as * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001, **** p<0.0001; ns , not significant, p>0.05. 45 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

Data availability 

Raw calcium imaging data and simulation results as well as summary anatomical and behavioral data will be posted to 

Dryad upon publication and are also available from the authors upon request. 

Code availability 5

Analysis and simulation code will be posted to Dryad upon publication and are also available from the authors upon 

request. 

Author contributions 

Imaging: RJM, KM, TF, JL, KW, DEE; Transgenics: RW, SN, MA, MH; Animal behavior: RM, DEE; Mathematical 10 

analysis: BW & SM; Computational modeling: BW, SM, DEE; Data analysis: RJM, KM, SJ, JM, CK, JD, NM, RW, 

EAS, DEE; Visualization: RJM, SM, BW, TF, DEE; Conceptualization: RJM, SM, BW, DEE; Funding acquisition: JH, 

KWE, DEE; Supervision: RJM, SM, DEE; Writing: RJM, SM, BW, DEE. 

Competing interests 15 

TF is the owner of Forward Scientific LLC, which contributed to the design and construction of the custom voice coil 

drive amplifier used for the μSled device in this study, and for generating CAD drawings of the device. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank David Herzfeld, Eric Lang, Larry Abbott, Nate Sawtell, Sascha du Lac, Nimish Pujara, 20 

and Betsy Quinlan for helpful advice on experimentation and interpretation. Research was supported by the National 

Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under award number R35GM146885 to DEE, 

Beckman Foundation support for the Beckman Center for Advanced Light Microscopy at the Morgridge Institute for 

Research, the Simons Foundation, Kavli Foundation, Swartz Foundation, and the Gatsby Charitable Foundation. 

25 

Supplementary information is available for this paper. 

Correspondence and requests for information should be addressed to David Ehrlich at dehrlich@wisc.edu. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 18

References: 

1.  M. Minsky, Steps toward artificial intelligence. Proc. IRE 49 , 8 –30 (1961). 

2.  T. P. Lillicrap, A. Santoro, L. Marris, C. J. Akerman, G. Hinton, Backpropagation and the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 

21 , 335 –346 (2020). 

3.  Y. Aso, D. Hattori, Y. Yu, R. M. Johnston, N. A. Iyer, T. -T. Ngo, H. Dionne, L. F. Abbott, R. Axel, H. Tanimoto, G. 

M. Rubin, The neuronal architecture of the mushroom body provides a logic for associative learning. eLife 3, e04577 

(2014). 

4.  P. Namburi, A. Beyeler, S. Yorozu, G. G. Calhoon, S. A. Halbert, R. Wichmann, S. S. Holden, K. L. Mertens, M. 

Anahtar, A. C. Felix -Ortiz, I. R. Wickersham, J. M. Gray, K. M. Tye, A circuit mechanism for differentiating 

positive and negative associations. Nature 520 , 675 –678 (2015). 

5.  S. Z. Muller, A. N. Zadina, L. F. Abbott, N. B. Sawtell, Continual learning in a multi -layer network of an electric 

fish. Cell 179 , 1382 –1392.e10 (2019). 

6.  M. D. Mauk, J. E. Steinmetz, R. F. Thompson, Classical conditioning using stimulation of the inferior olive as the 

unconditioned stimulus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 83 , 5349 –5353 (1986). 

7.  J. F. Medina, M. D. Mauk, Computer simulation of cerebellar information processing. Nat. Neurosci. 3 (Suppl.), 

1205 –1211 (2000). 

8.  J. F. Medina, S. G. Lisberger, Links from complex spikes to local plasticity and motor learning in the cerebellum of 

awake -behaving monkeys. Nat. Neurosci. 11 , 1185 –1192 (2008). 

9.  R. Apps, R. Hawkes, Cerebellar cortical organization: a one -map hypothesis. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10 , 670 –681 

(2009). 

10.  D. J. Herzfeld, Y. Kojima, R. Soetedjo, R. Shadmehr, Encoding of action by the Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. 

Nature 526 , 439 –442 (2015). 

11.  D. J. Herzfeld, Y. Kojima, R. Soetedjo, R. Shadmehr, Encoding of error and learning to correct that error by the 

Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. Nat. Neurosci. 21 , 736 –743 (2018). 

12.  S. A. Heiney, G. J. Wojaczynski, J. F. Medina, Action -based organization of a cerebellar module specialized for 

predictive control of multiple body parts. Neuron 109 , 2981 –2994.e5 (2021). 

13.  S. Z. Muller, J. S. Pi, P. Hage, M. A. Fakharian, E. Sedaghat -Nejad, R. Shadmehr, Complex spikes perturb 

movements and reveal the sensorimotor map of Purkinje cells. Curr. Biol. 33 , 4869 –4879 (2023). 

14.  H. Straka, R. Baker, Vestibular blueprint in early vertebrates. Front. Neural Circuits 7, 182 (2013). 

15.  H. Fujita, T. Kodama, S. du Lac, Modular output circuits of the fastigial nucleus for diverse motor and nonmotor 

functions of the cerebellar vermis. eLife 9, e58613 (2020). 

16.  J. M. Kebschull, E. B. Richman, N. Ringach, D. Friedmann, E. Albarran, S. S. Kolluru, R. C. Jones, W. E. Allen, Y. 

Wang, S. W. Cho, H. Zhou, J. B. Ding, H. Y. Chang, K. Deisseroth, S. R. Quake, L. Luo, Cerebellar nuclei evolved 

by repeatedly duplicating a conserved cell -type set. Science 370 , eabd5059 (2020). 

17.  X. Zhang, W. Guan, T. Yang, A. Furlan, X. Xiao, K. Yu, X. An, W. Galbavy, C. Ramakrishnan, K. Deisseroth, K. 

Ritola, A. Hantman, M. He, Z. J. Huang, B. Li, Genetically identified amygdala -striatal circuits for valence -specific 

behaviors. Nat. Neurosci. 24 , 1586 –1600 (2021). 

18.  B. Bornstein, H. Mark, D. Lerner, N. Lichter, O. Ulanovsky, M. Katzav, M. Ben -David, D. Kadosh, M. Rotkopf, T. 

Segev, E. Perlson, B. Shilo, E. D. Schejter, Transneuronal Dpr12/DIP -δ interactions facilitate compartmentalized 

dopaminergic innervation of Drosophila mushroom body axons. EMBO J. 40 , e105673 (2021). 

19.  N. L. Cerminara, E. J. Lang, R. V. Sillitoe, R. Apps, Redefining the cerebellar cortex as an assembly of non -uniform 

Purkinje cell microcircuits . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 16, 79 -93 (2015 ). 

20.  D. H. Hubel, T. N. Wiesel, The period of susceptibility to the physiological effects of unilateral eye closure in 

kittens. J. Physiol. 206 , 419 –436 (1970). 

21.  H. Van der Loos, T. A. Woolsey, Somatosensory cortex: structural alterations following early injury to sense organs. 

Science 179 , 395 –398 (1973). 

22.  L. C. Katz, C. J. Shatz, Synaptic activity and the construction of cortical circuits. Science 274 , 1133 –1138 (1996). 

23.  A. E. Ronca, B. Fritzsch, L. L. Bruce, J. R. Alberts, Orbital spaceflight during pregnancy shapes function of 

mammalian vestibular system. Behav. Neurosci. 122 , 224 –232 (2008). 

24.  J. Raymond, D. Demêmes, E. Blanc, C. J. Dechesne, Development of the vestibular system in microgravity, in The 

Neurolab Spacelab Mission: Neuroscience Research in Space , J. C. Buckey Jr., J. L. Homick, Eds. (NASA SP -2003 -

535, NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, 2003), pp. 143 –149. 

25.  C. C. Bell, V. Han, N. B. Sawtell, Cerebellum -like structures and their implications for cerebellar function. Annu. 

Rev. Neurosci. 31 , 1 –24 (2008). 

26.  S. Chen, C. N. Chiu, K. L. McArthur, J. R. Fetcho, D. A. Prober, TRP channel mediated neuronal activation and 

ablation in freely behaving zebrafish. Nat. Methods 13 , 147 –150 (2016). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 19

27.  F. Auer, K. Nardone, K. Matsuda, M. Hibi, D. Schoppik, Cerebellar Purkinje cells control posture in larval zebrafish 

(Danio rerio ). eLife 13 , RP97614 (2025). 

28.  V. Vlachová, J. Teisinger, K. Susánková, A. Lyfenko, R. Ettrich, L. Vyklický, Functional role of C -terminal 

cytoplasmic tail of rat vanilloid receptor 1. J. Neurosci. 23 , 1340 –1350 (2003). 

29.  M. K. Chung, S. Wang, Cold suppresses agonist -induced activation of TRPV1. J. Dent. Res. 90 , 1098 –1107 (2011). 

30.  K. Schilling, M. H. Dickinson, J. A. Connor, J. I. Morgan, Electrical activity in cerebellar cultures determines 

Purkinje cell dendritic growth patterns. Neuron 7, 891 –902 (1991). 

31.  C. Osório, J. J. White, P. Torrents Solé, J. Yang, N. Mandemaker, F. Olivero, F. Kirwan, L. Post, Z. Hemmat, F. de 

Winter, E. Regolo, F. R. Fiocchi, I. Serra, S. Tjon, Z. Ozgur, M. C. G. N. van den Hout, W. F. J. van Ijcken, G. 

López -Bendito, A. Badura, L. Lim, G. van Woerden, M. Schonewille, Purkinje cell intrinsic activity shapes 

cerebellar development and function. Nat. Commun. (2026). 

32.  Y. Mu, D. V. Bennett, M. Rubinov, S. Narayan, C. -T. Yang, M. Tanimoto, B. D. Mensh, L. L. Looger, M. B. 

Ahrens, Glia accumulate evidence that actions are futile and suppress unsuccessful behavior. Cell 178 , 27 –43.e19 

(2019). 

33.  J. C. Eccles, R. Llinás, K. Sasaki, The excitatory synaptic action of climbing fibres on the Purkinje cells of the 

cerebellum. J. Physiol. 182 , 268 –296 (1966). 

34.  M. Sengupta, V. Thirumalai, AMPA receptor mediated synaptic excitation drives state -dependent bursting in 

Purkinje neurons of zebrafish larvae. eLife 4, e09158 (2015). 

35.  A. Lin, E. Álvarez -Salvado, N. Milicic, N. Pujara, D. E. Ehrlich, Multisensory navigational strategies of hatchling 

fish for dispersal. Curr. Biol. 33 , 4917 –4925 (2023). 

36.  Y. K. Hong, S. Park, E. Y. Litvina, J. Morales, J. R. Sanes, C. Chen, Refinement of the retinogeniculate synapse by 

bouton clustering. Neuron 84 , 332 –339 (2014). 

37.  K. P. Berry, E. Nedivi, Experience -dependent structural plasticity in the visual system. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci. 2, 17 –35 

(2016). 

38.  M. Takeuchi, K. Matsuda, S. Yamaguchi, K. Asakawa, N. Miyasaka, P. Lal, Y. Yoshihara, A. Koga, K. Kawakami, 

T. Shimizu, M. Hibi, Establishment of Gal4 transgenic zebrafish lines for analysis of development of cerebellar 

neural circuitry. Dev. Biol. 397 , 1 –17 (2015). 

39.  H. -G. Xue, C. -Y. Yang, N. Yamamoto, Afferent sources to the inferior olive and distribution of the olivocerebellar 

climbing fibers in cyprinids. J. Comp. Neurol. 507 , 1409 –1427 (2008). 

40.  G. Migault, T. L. van der Plas, H. Trentesaux, T. Panier, R. Candelier, R. Proville, B. Englitz, G. Debrégeas, V. 

Bormuth, Whole -brain calcium imaging during physiological vestibular stimulation in larval zebrafish. Curr. Biol. 

28 , 3723 –3735.e6 (2018). 

41.  G. Vanwalleghem, K. Schuster, M. A. Taylor, I. A. Favre -Bulle, E. K. Scott, Brain -wide mapping of water flow 

perception in zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 40 , 4130 –4144 (2020). 

42.  G. Valera, D. A. Markov, K. Bijari, O. Randlett, A. Asgharsharghi, J. -P. Baudoin, G. A. Ascoli, R. Portugues, H. 

López -Schier, A neuronal blueprint for directional mechanosensation in larval zebrafish. Curr. Biol. 31 , 1463 –

1475.e6 (2021). 

43.  R. Félix, D. A. Markov, S. L. Renninger, A. R. Tomás, A. Laborde, M. R. Carey, M. B. Orger, R. Portugues, 

Structural and functional organization of visual responses in the inferior olive of larval zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 44 ,

e2352212023 (2024). 

44.  E. T. Lunsford, M. Carbo -Tano, C. Wyart, Whole -body central processing of lateral line inputs encodes flow 

direction relative to the center -of -mass. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 123 , e2515782123 (2026). 

45.  K. R. Hamling, K. Harmon, D. Schoppik, The nature and origin of synaptic inputs to vestibulospinal neurons in the 

larval zebrafish. eNeuro 10 , ENEURO.0090 -23.2023 (2023). 

46.  Z. Liu, Y. Kimura, S. Higashijima, D. G. C. Hildebrand, J. L. Morgan, M. W. Bagnall, Central vestibular tuning 

arises from patterned convergence of otolith afferents. Neuron 108 , 748 –762.e4 (2020). 

47.  J. L. Raymond, J. F. Medina, Computational principles of supervised learning in the cerebellum. Annu. Rev. 

Neurosci. 41 , 233 –253 (2018). 

48.  D. E. Ehrlich, D. Schoppik, A primal role for the vestibular sense in the development of coordinated locomotion. 

eLife 8, e45839 (2019). 

49.  P. Oteiza, I. Odstrcil, G. Lauder, R. Portugues, F. Engert, A novel mechanism for mechanosensory -based rheotaxis in 

larval zebrafish. Nature 547 , 445 –448 (2017). 

50.  M. Ito, M. Kano, Long -lasting depression of parallel fiber –Purkinje cell transmission induced by conjunctive 

stimulation of parallel fibers and climbing fibers in the cerebellar cortex. Neurosci. Lett. 33 , 253 –258 (1982). 

51.  P. Dean, J. Porrill, Decorrelation learning in the cerebellum: computational analysis and experimental questions. 

Prog. Brain Res. 210 , 157 –192 (2014). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 20

52.  D. Marr, A theory of cerebellar cortex. J. Physiol. 202 , 437 –470 (1969). 

53.  J. S. Albus, A theory of cerebellar function. Math. Biosci. 10 , 25 –61 (1971). 

54.  M. Ito, Neural design of the cerebellar motor control system. Brain Res. 40 , 81 –84 (1972). 

55.  G. Bouvier, J. Aljadeff, C. Clopath, C. Bimbard, J. Ranft, A. Blot, J. -P. Nadal, N. Brunel, V. Hakim, B. Barbour, 

Cerebellar learning using perturbations. eLife 7, e31599 (2018). 

56.  D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, R. J. Williams, Learning representations by back -propagating errors. Nature 323 ,

533 –536 (1986). 

57.  B. A. Richards, T. P. Lillicrap, P. Beaudoin, Y. Bengio, R. Bogacz, A. Christensen, C. Clopath, R. P. Costa, A. de 

Berker, S. Ganguli, C. J. Gillon, D. Hafner, A. Kepecs, N. Kriegeskorte, P. Latham, G. W. Lindsay, K. D. Miller, R. 

Naud, C. C. Pack, P. Poir azi, P. Roelfsema, J. Sacramento, A. Saxe, B. Scellier, A. C. Schapiro, W. Senn, G. Wayne, 

D. Yamins, F. Zenke, J. Zylberberg, D. Therien, K. P. Kording, A deep learning framework for neuroscience. Nat. 

Neurosci. 22 , 1761 –1770 (2019). 

58.  J. B. Ackman, T. J. Burbridge, M. C. Crair, Retinal waves coordinate patterned activity throughout the developing 

visual system. Nature 490 , 219 –225 (2012). 

59.  N. Matsumoto, D. Barson, L. Liang, M. C. Crair, Hebbian instruction of axonal connectivity by endogenous 

correlated spontaneous activity. Science 385 , eadh7814 (2024). 

60.  K. Hashimoto, M. Kano, Functional differentiation of multiple climbing fiber inputs during synapse elimination in 

the developing cerebellum. Neuron 38 , 785 –796 (2003). 

61.  G. M. Innocenti, D. J. Price, Exuberance in the development of cortical networks. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 955 –965 

(2005). 

62.  B. Scelfo, P. Strata, Correlation between multiple climbing fibre regression and parallel fibre response development 

in the postnatal mouse cerebellum. Eur. J. Neurosci. 21 , 971 –978 (2005). 

63.  K. Hashimoto, T. Yoshida, K. Sakimura, M. Mishina, M. Watanabe, M. Kano, Influence of parallel fiber –Purkinje 

cell synapse formation on postnatal development of climbing fiber –Purkinje cell synapses in the cerebellum. 

Neuroscience 162 , 601 –611 (2009). 

64.  J. -Y. Hsieh, B. Ulrich, F. A. Issa, J. Wan, D. M. Papazian, Rapid development of Purkinje cell excitability, 

functional cerebellar circuit, and afferent sensory input to cerebellum in zebrafish. Front. Neural Circuits 8, 147 

(2014). 

65.  A. M. Richardson, G. Sokoloff, M. S. Blumberg, A transient feature of the inferior olive supports the development of 

cerebellar internal models. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2025).  https://doi.org/10.64898/2025.12.06.692744 .

66.  S. Verma, S. Narayanan, V. Thirumalai, Developmental synaptic pruning in the olivo -cerebellar circuit sculpts 

sensori -motor encoding and predictive processing. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2025). 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.01.01.630979 .

67.  W. C. Leggett, E. Deblois, Recruitment in marine fishes: is it regulated by starvation and predation in the egg and 

larval stages? Neth. J. Sea Res. 32 , 119 –134 (1994). 

68.  R. Spence, G. Gerlach, C. Lawrence, C. Smith, The behaviour and ecology of the zebrafish, Danio rerio . Biol. Rev. 

83 , 13 –34 (2008). 

69.  V. China, R. Holzman, Hydrodynamics of pursuit predation: effects of body size and fin configuration on 

locomotory performance of larval fishes. J. Exp. Biol. 217 , 1230 –1240 (2014). 

70.  D. M. Parichy, Advancing biology through a deeper understanding of zebrafish ecology and evolution. eLife 4,

e05635 (2015). 

71.  E. D. Houde, Emerging from Hjort's shadow. J. Northwest Atl. Fish. Sci. 41 , 53 –70 (2008). 

72.  R. E. Hernandez, L. Galitan, J. Cameron, N. Goodwin, L. Ramakrishnan, Delay of initial feeding of zebrafish larvae 

until 8 days postfertilization has no impact on survival or growth through the juvenile stage. Zebrafish 15 , 515 –518 

(2018). 

73.  M. Aizenberg, E. M. Schuman, Cerebellar -dependent learning in larval zebrafish. J. Neurosci. 31 , 8708 –8712 

(2011). 

74.  T. C. Harmon, U. Magaram, D. L. McLean, I. M. Raman, Distinct responses of Purkinje neurons and roles of simple 

spikes during associative motor learning in larval zebrafish. eLife 6, e22537 (2017). 

75.  D. A. Markov, L. Petrucco, A. M. Kist, R. Portugues, A cerebellar internal model calibrates a feedback controller 

involved in sensorimotor control. Nat. Commun. 12 , 6694 (2021). 

76.  M. Najac, D. L. McLean, I. M. Raman, Synaptic variance and action potential firing of cerebellar output neurons 

during motor learning in larval zebrafish. Curr. Biol. 33 , 3299 –3311 (2023). 

77.  S. Narayanan, A. Varma, V. Thirumalai, Predictive neural computations in the cerebellum contribute to motor 

planning and faster behavioral responses in larval zebrafish. Sci. Adv. 10 , eadi6470 (2024). 

78.  D. Bavelier, H. J. Neville, Cross -modal plasticity: where and how? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3, 443 –452 (2002). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21

79.  K. Iny, A. J. Heynen, E. Sklar, M. F. Bear, Bidirectional modifications of visual acuity induced by monocular 

deprivation in juvenile and adult rats. J. Neurosci. 26 , 7368 –7374 (2006). 

80.  I. Shainer, E. Kuehn, E. Laurell, M. Al Kassar, N. Mokayes, S. Sherman, J. Larsch, M. Kunst, H. Baier, A single -cell 

resolution gene expression atlas of the larval zebrafish brain. Sci. Adv. 9, eade9909 (2023). 

81.  M. Najac, I. M. Raman, Synaptic excitation by climbing fibre collaterals in the cerebellar nuclei of juvenile and adult 

mice. J. Physiol. 595 , 6703 –6718 (2017). 

82.  J. Pickford, R. Apps, Collateral impact: a dual role for climbing fibre collaterals to the cerebellar nuclei? J. Physiol. 

595 , 6839 –6840 (2017). 

83.  L. A. Kirkby, G. S. Sack, A. Firl, M. B. Feller, A role for correlated spontaneous activity in the assembly of neural 

circuits. Neuron 80 , 1129 –1144 (2013). 

84.  L. S. Stone, S. G. Lisberger, Visual responses of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar flocculus during smooth -pursuit eye 

movements in monkeys. I. Simple spikes. J. Neurophysiol. 63 , 1241 –1261 (1990). 

85.  Y. Kojima, Co -tuning of activity in Purkinje cells and target neurons in the cerebellar nuclei. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 

13 , 22 (2019). 

86.  M. A. Fakharian, A. M. Shoup, P. Hage, H. Y. Elseweifi, R. Shadmehr, A vector calculus for neural computation in 

the cerebellum. Science 388 , 869 –875 (2025). 

87.  O. Sporns, G. M. Edelman, Solving Bernstein's problem: a proposal for the development of coordinated movement 

by selection. Child Dev. 64 , 960 –981 (1993). 

88.  A. Suvrathan, H. L. Payne, J. L. Raymond, Timing rules for synaptic plasticity matched to behavioral function. 

Neuron 92 , 959 –967 (2016). 

89.  S. Jayabal, B. J. Bhasin, M. Kounga, J. DiSanto, A. Suvrathan, M. S. Goldman, J. L. Raymond, Experience alters the 

timing rules governing synaptic plasticity and learning. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2024). 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.11.28.518128 .

90.  M. C. Crair, R. C. Malenka, A critical period for long -term potentiation at thalamocortical synapses. Nature 375 ,

325 –328 (1995). 

91.  D. E. Feldman, The spike -timing dependence of plasticity. Neuron 75 , 556 –571 (2012). 

92.  S. Valtcheva, V. Paillé, Y. Dembitskaya, S. Perez, G. Gangarossa, E. Fino, L. Venance, Developmental control of 

spike -timing -dependent plasticity by tonic GABAergic signaling in striatum. Neuropharmacology 121 , 261 –277 

(2017). 

93.  F. Kimura, C. Itami, A hypothetical model concerning how spike -timing -dependent plasticity contributes to neural 

circuit formation and initiation of the critical period in barrel cortex. J. Neurosci. 39 , 3784 –3791 (2019). 

94.  P. Mullen, H. Shaweis, M. F. Zwart, The inferior olive transforms upstream sensorimotor errors into cerebellar 

teaching signals. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2026).  https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711185 .

95.  T. P. Lillicrap, D. Cownden, D. B. Tweed, C. J. Akerman, Random synaptic feedback weights support error 

backpropagation for deep learning. Nat. Commun. 7, 13276 (2016). 

96.  A. M. Saxe, J. L. McClelland, S. Ganguli, Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning in deep linear neural 

networks. International Conference on Learning Representations (2014).  https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6120 .

97.  S. Ohmae, J. F. Medina, Climbing fibers encode a temporal -difference prediction error during cerebellar learning in 

mice. Nat. Neurosci. 18 , 1798 –1803 (2015). 

98.  W. Heffley, E. Y. Song, Z. Xu, B. N. Taylor, M. A. Hughes, A. McKinney, M. Joshua, C. Hull, Coordinated 

cerebellar climbing -fiber activity signals learned sensorimotor predictions. Nat. Neurosci. 21 , 1431 –1441 (2018). 

99.  D. Kostadinov, M. Beau, M. Blanco Pozo, M. Häusser, Predictive and reactive reward signals conveyed by climbing 

fiber inputs to cerebellar Purkinje cells. Nat. Neurosci. 22 , 950 –962 (2019). 

100.  J. S. Pi, M. A. Fakharian, P. Hage, E. Sedaghat -Nejad, S. Z. Muller, R. Shadmehr, The olivary input to the 

cerebellum dissociates sensory events from movement plans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 121 , e2318849121 

(2024). 

101.  J. N. J. Reynolds, B. I. Hyland, J. R. Wickens, A cellular mechanism of reward -related learning. Nature 413 , 67 –70 

(2001). 

102.  C. Grienberger, J. C. Magee, Entorhinal cortex directs learning -related changes in CA1 representations. Nature 611 ,

554 –562 (2022). 

103.  V. Francioni, V. D. Tang, E. H. S. Toloza, Z. Ding, N. J. Brown, M. T. Harnett, Vectorized instructive signals in 

cortical dendrites. Nature (2026).  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -026 -10190 -7.

104.  A. M. Zador, A critique of pure learning and what artificial neural networks can learn from animal brains. Nat. 

Commun. 10 , 3770 (2019). 

105.  J. A. Lister, C. P. Robertson, T. Lepage, S. L. Johnson, D. W. Raible, nacre encodes a zebrafish microphthalmia -

related protein that regulates neural -crest -derived pigment cell fate. Development 126 , 3757 –3767 (1999). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

106.  E. Yang, M. F. Zwart, B. James, M. Rubinov, Z. Wei, S. Narayan, N. Vladim irov, B. D. Mensh, J. E. Fitzg erald, M. 

B. Ahrens . A brainstem integrator fo r self -location memory and positional homeosta sis in zebrafish. Cell , 22 , 5011 -

50 27 (2022). 

107.  K. M. Tabor, S. A. Bergeron, E. J. Horstick, D. C. Jordan, V. Aho, T. Porkka -Heiskanen, G. Haspel, H. A. Burgess, 

Direct activation of the Mauthner cell by electric field pulses drives ultrarapid escape responses. J. Neurophysiol. 

112 , 834 –844 (2014). 

108.  M. Weber, M. Mickoleit, J. Huisken, Multilayer mounting for long -term light sheet microscopy of zebrafish. J. Vis. 

Exp. 84 , e51119 (2014). 

109.  J. Schindelin, I. Arganda -Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. Rueden, S. Saalfeld, 

B. Schmid, J. -Y. Tinevez, D. J. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P. Tomancak, A. Cardona, Fiji: an open -source 

platform for biologica l-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676 –682 (2012). 

110.  C. Arshadi, U. Günther, M. Eddison, K. I. S. Harrington, T. A. Ferreira, SNT: a unifying toolbox for quantification 

of neuronal anatomy. Nat. Methods 18 , 374 –377 (2021). 

111.  M. Kunst, E. Laurell, N. Mokayes, A. Kramer, F. Kubo, A. M. Fernandes, D. Förster, M. Dal Maschio, H. Baier, A 

cellular -resolution atlas of the larval zebrafish brain. Neuron 103 , 21 –38.e5 (2019). 

112.  O. Randlett, C. L. Wee, E. A. Naumann, O. Nnaemeka, D. Schoppik, J. E. Fitzgerald, R. Portugues, A. M. B. 

Lacoste, C. Riegler, F. Engert, A. F. Schier, Whole -brain activity mapping onto a zebrafish brain atlas. Nat. Methods 

12 , 1039 –1046 (2015). 

113.  T. D. Pereira, N. Tabris, A. Matsliah, D. M. Turner, J. Li, S. Ravindranath, E. S. Papadoyannis, E. Normand, D. S. 

Deutsch, Z. Y. Wang, G. C. McKenzie -Smith, C. C. Mitelut, M. D. Castro, J. D'Uva, M. Kislin, D. H. Sanes, S. D. 

Kocher, S. S. -H. Wang, A. L. Falkner, J. W. Shaevitz, M. Murthy, SLEAP: A deep learning system for multi -animal 

pose tracking. Nat. Methods 19 , 486 –495 (2022). 

114.  W. Thielicke, E. J. Stamhuis, PIVlab – Towards user -friendly, affordable and accurate digital particle image 

velocimetry in MATLAB. J. Open Res. Softw. 2, e30 (2014). 

115.  P. Thévenaz, U. E. Ruttimann, M. Unser, A pyramid approach to subpixel registration based on intensity. IEEE 

Trans. Image Process. 7, 27 –41 (1998). 

116.  C. Garcia -Lopez -de -Haro, C. Fuster -Barcelo, C. T. Rueden, J. Heras, V. Ulman, D. Franco -Barranco, A. Ines, K. W. 

Eliceiri, J. -C. Olivo -Marin, J. -Y. Tinevez, D. Sage, A. Munoz -Barrutia, SAMJ: Fast image annotation on ImageJ/Fiji 

via Segment Anything Model. arXiv :2506.02783 [Preprint] (2025). 

117.  K. R. Hamling, Y. Zhu, F. Auer, D. Schoppik, Tilt in place microscopy: a simple, low -cost solution to image neural 

responses to body rotations. J. Neurosci. 43 , 1596 –1608 (2023). 

118.  N. Brunel, V. Hakim, P. Isope, J. -P. Nadal, B. Barbour, Optimal information storage and the distribution of synaptic 

weights: perceptron versus Purkinje cell. Neuron 43 , 745 –757 (2004). 

119.  E. S. Ruthazer, C. J. Akerman, H. T. Cline, Control of axon branch dynamics by correlated activity in vivo. Science 

301 , 66 –70 (2003). 

120.  R. Shadmehr, Population coding in the cerebellum: a machine learning perspective. J. Neurophysiol. 124 , 1606 –1629 

(2020). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Supplemental Figures: 

Supplemental Figure S1. Immature bouton properties of Purkinje cell axons following direct stimulation. Median bouton width 

(left ) and bouton density ( right ) along Purkinje cell axons in the flow nucleus (mean ± SEM) in larvae with and without 1 μM 

capsaicin exposure (width: Student’s t -test, t(13) = 1.56, not significant; density: t -test, t(10) = 2.49, * p< .05). 

Supplemental Figure S2. Purkinje cell stimulation induces ectopic projections. (A,B,C ) Representative micrographs of Purkinje 

cell axons exhibiting atypical projections following 48 -hr exposure to 1 μM capsaicin (12 days , Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP; 

elav3l:H2B -jGCaMP7f )), including ( A) commissural projections, ( B), projections into the caudal hindbrain, and ( C) projections into 

the spinal cord. 

Supplemental Figure S3. Purkinje cell stimulation reduces cerebellar molecular layer size. (A) Average molecular layer volume 

is reduced by 33.1% in larvae exposed to 1 μM capsaicin for 48 hr compared to controls (8 days , Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP; 

elavl3:H2B -jGCaMP7f), Student's t -test, t(8) = 3.39, * p< 0.05). ( B) Representative 3D renderings of molecular layers from two 

samples (right cerebellar hemisphere). ( C) Molecular layer thickness decreases with increasing capsaicin dose (0, 0.1, 0.5, 1 μM; 48 

hr). Thickness was measured at the maximal width of the layer; gray line indicates linear regression fit. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Supplemental Figure S4. Representative Purkinje cell projections to vestibular nuclei. Horizontal projection of traced Purkinje 

cell axons within the vestibular nuclei (yellow) in one hemisphere of a representative fish, overlaid on a single correspondi ng 

micrograph of neuronal nuclei (12 days , Tg(aldoca:TRPV1 -tagRFP (not shown); elavl3:H2B -jGCaMP7f) ). 

Supplemental Figure S5. Distribution of bouton sizes after CM. Histograms of bouton size for Purkinje cell axons in the flow 

nucleus at 12 days across three bins for larvae raised with CM and sibling controls (mean ± SEM across individuals, n=8). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

Supplemental Figure S6. Computer -assisted design drawing of μSled constructions. See Bill of Materials in Table 1 for parts. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26 

Supplemental Figure S7. μSled motion characterization. (A) Two -photon line -scan imaging of fluorescent beads on the uSled 

during a step function. Steps were incremented by 0.1V drive and held for 1 sec before a reset to the 0V center position. (B,C) Two -

photon image of a fluorescent slide showing field uniformity across the entire 812um field ( B, 1x zoom, scale bar 100mm) and at 2x 

zoom ( C, scale bar 100mm). (D) Whole -field image of 1μm beads showing position of line scan in panel A (scale bar 100mm). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Supplemental Figure S8. Positive alignment of instruction and downstream function is required for learning. (A) All connectivity 

patterns between Purkinje (P) and target cells (T) used in the simulations. The title denotes the Frobenius value. ( B) Effect of alignment 

on performance of learning in the instructed (potent) and orthogonal (null) direction . The total error reported in the paper is the sum of 

these errors. For networks with positive alignment (shaded area), learning converges such that all instructed directions are lear ned ( left )

and error relative to initial error decreases ( right ). The vertical dashed line denotes the Frobenius value at which both eigenvalues 

become positive. ( C) Learning is faster with greater alignment, resulting in faster reduction of the mean squared error (MSE) in both 

the potent and null directions. (D, E) For the aligned W2 (D) learning in all directions (where each line represents one of 16 directions) 

converges such that in the potent direction the effective weight (defined in the Methods ) converges to one ( left ) and converges to zero 

in the null direction ( right ). For the misaligned W2 (E) learning diverges in all directions. ( F, G ) W1 at the end of the simulation for the 

aligned ( F) and the misaligned ( G) W2.

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

Supplemental Figure S 9. Example swimming trajectories from flow assay. Representative traces from individually tracked 12 

days fish showing raw position data (orange dots) and low -pass filtered trajectories (lines). 

Table 1. Bill of Materials for μSled. 

Qty  Item  Manufacturer  Part number  Notes 

Drive system 

1 Voice Coil  Thorlabs  VC125 

1 Kinematic Mount  Thorlabs  KMS 

1 Post  Thorlabs  TR1.5 

1 Post Holder  Thorlabs  PH2E 

1 Post Clamp  Thorlabs  CF035 

1 Amplifier  Custom / Forward 

Scientific 

OPA548 - based 

voltage amplifier 

1 4-40 x 0.25" 

SHCS 

McMaster -Carr / 

various 

For voice -coil magnet -to -bracket 

1 4-40 x 0.25" Set 

screw 

McMaster -Carr / 

various 

For voice coil -to -KMS mount 

1 Right -angle 

Bracket 

Custom  3D -print  Can print in any material but PC/ABS 

or PA12 -CF best for strength/stability. 

Stage Mechanics 

1 Precision linear 

rail 

IKO Japan  BWU 25 -75 

1 Yaw/Pitch Mount  Thorlabs  KPY1  Modified with M3 counterbore holes 

to suit IKO rail 

4 M3 x 5mm SHCS  McMaster -Carr  To mount KPY1 to IKO linear rail 

1 ~1" Extension  McMaster -Carr  Use a light spring. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Spring 

2 M3 x 10mm 

Button -head 

Screw 

McMaster -Carr  To hold centering spring 

Z-Adjustable Base 

1 Base Top  Custom  3D -print  Can print in any material but PC/ABS 

or PA12 -CF best for strength/stability. 

1 Base Bottom  Custom  3D -print  Can print in any material but PC/ABS 

or PA12 -CF best for strength/stability. 

4 Spring - extension 

0.12"OD x 1" 

length 

McMaster -Carr  7749N116 

4 Roll pin -

1/16x0.5" 

McMaster -Carr  98296A027 

4 Roll pin - 1/16x1"  McMaster -Carr  98296A043 

1 Steel Ball 0.25"  McMaster -Carr  96415K75  Light epoxy to hold in place. 

2 Nd Magnets, 

0.25"dia x 0.15" 

McMaster -Carr / 

various 

Press/glue into plastic to form hard 

seat for adjustment screws 

2 Fine adjustment 

screw 

Thorlabs  F3SS15 

2 Adjustment screw 

threaded bushing 

Thorlabs  F3SSN1P  Heat -set flush into plastic, with flange 

facing out. 

2 1/4 -20 x 0.5" 

SHCS 

McMaster -Carr / 

various 

For mounting to breadboard 

1 Breadboard 6x12  Thorlabs  MB612F 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Appendix 

We consider the four-layer network (Granule cells → Purkinje cells → Target nuclei → Output) 

f (rgc ) = W 3ϕ2(W 2ϕ1(W 1rgc )) 

where rgc ∈ RN1 , W 1 ∈ RN2×N1 , W 2 ∈ RN3×N2 and W 3 ∈ RdY ×N3 , and we assume that W 3 is fixed. For convenience, we denote the neuron activity in each layer as 

rpc = ϕ1(W 1rgc ) ∈ RN1 , rtn = ϕ2(W 2rpc )

hpc = W 1rgc , htn = W 2rpc 

The training data is D = ( xi, y i)P 

> 1

⊆ RN1 × RdY . rgc = xi and we sample one data point (xi, y i) during each training step (single-batch). The learning of W 1 at each iteration is driven by climbing fiber input to the Purkinje cells (rcf )

and follows a modified delta rule in which the error is weighted through the matrix Aio ∈ RN2×dY ,

dW 1

dt = η1rio rTgc 

= η1Aio ϕA (yi − f (rgc )) rTgc (1) 

= η1Aio [yi − f (rgc )] rTgc (if ϕA is linear )

The loss function is then, 

L(W 1) = X

> i

 yi − W 3ϕ2(W 2ϕ1(W 1rgc )) 2 (2) The loss change following learning is, 

dL (W 1)

dt =

 ∂L ∂W 1 , dW 1

dt 



> F

= −η1tr 

h

rgc [yi − f (rgc )] T ATio ϕ′

> 1

(hpc )W 2T ϕ′

> 2

(he)W 3T [yi − f (rgc )] rTgc 

i

= −η1 ∥rgc ∥22 [yi − f (rgc )] T ATio ϕ′

> 1

(hpc )W 2T ϕ′

> 2

(he)W 3T [yi − f (rgc )] = −η1 ∥rgc ∥22 [yi − f (rgc )] T ATio ϕ′

> 1

(hpc )W 2T W 3T [yi − f (rgc )] (if ϕ2 is linear ) (3) Note that ϕ′

> 1

(hpc ) and ϕ′

> 2

(htn ) represent diagonal matrices whose elements are given by the vector ϕ′

> 1

(hpc ) and the vector ϕ′

> 2

(htn ) respectively. The above loss change has the form −xT M x , and it is negative for all x if the matrix 

M = ATio ϕ′

> 1

(hpc )W 2T W 3T

is positive definite, guaranteeing a decrease of the loss function. 

A. Thus, based on this form, we derive the following sufficient (results 1&2) and necessary (results 3&4) conditions: 1. For a linear function or ReLU ϕ1 that operates in the linear regime, ϕ′

> 1

(hpc ) = 1 (and since Purkinje cells have high baseline firing rate, they are assumed to operate in approximately a linear regime). Then, 

W 3W 2Aio is positive definite =⇒ dL (W 1)

dt ≤ 0, ∀rgc , y i, W 1 (4) 2. For monotonically non-decreasing nonlinearity ϕ1 (saturating or non-saturating), ϕ′

> 1

(hpc ) ≥ 0. Then, 

ATio = W 3W 2D =⇒ dL (W 1)

dt ≤ 0, ∀rgc , y i, W 1 (5) where D is a diagonal matrix of all positive values. Defining W ≡ W 3W 2, we have M = W Dϕ ′

> 1

(hpc )W T , since Dϕ ′

> 1

(hpc ) ≥ 0, M is positive semidefinite. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 29, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.24.734069 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23. For a linear or any monotonically increasing nonlinearity ϕ1, ϕ ′

> 1

(hpc ) > 0. Then, 

dL (W 1)

dt ≤ 0, ∀rgc , y i, W 1 =⇒ W 3W 2Aio is positive definite . (6) This means that for some tasks W 3W 2Aio must be positive definite for the loss to decrease (see Proof below), and that the opposite (i.e. making W 3W 2Aio not positive semidefinite) is not useful for any task (shown in 1&2). Note that this is a sufficient (result 1) and necessary condition for loss to decrease with linear ϕ.

Proof: We can choose W1 such that hpc ’s are all equal (for example by making all rows of W1 equal), making 

ϕ′(hpc ) behaves like a positive scalar and thus decrease in loss is equivalent to 

[yi − f (rgc )] T ATio W 2T W 3T [yi − f (rgc )] > 0

Since yi and rgc can be arbitrary, it means that W 3W 2Aio is positive definite. 4. For saturating monotonically increasing nonlinearity ϕ1, ϕ ′

> 1

(hpc ) ≥ 0 Then, 

dL (W 1)

dt ≤ 0, ∀rgc , y i, W 1 =⇒ ATio = W 3W 2D (7) where D is a diagonal matrix of all positive values. This means that for some tasks ATio = W 3W 2D for the loss to decrease (see Proof below), and that the opposite (i.e. Aio deviating from W 3W 2D) is not useful for any task (shown in 2). Note that this is a sufficient (result 2) and necessary condition for loss to decrease with saturating nonlinearity ϕ.

Proof: We can choose W1 and xi such that ϕ′(hpc ) equal to the ith standard basis (by making all but one Purkinje cell in the saturated regime) and the matrix M becomes 

Aio [i, :] T W [: , i ]T , i = 1 , 2..., N 1 and W ≡ W 3W 2

This rank-one matrix is positive semidefinite iff 

Aio [i, :] T = diW [: , i ], i = 1 , 2..., N 1

(where di is a positive scalar). This equality is equivalent to 

ATio = W 3W 2D

B. Here we show how a W 2 matrix obtained via Hebbian plasticity during development may satisfy the alignment condition. Suppose that during development, the efference layer has spontaneous activity rtn (t), which drives the activity in the PC layer through ION connectivity: rio = Aio W 3rtn . Then W 2 undergoes Hebbian plasticity, 

τ2

dW 2

dt = η2rtn rTio − W 2 (8) 

= η2rtn rTtn W 3T ATio − W 2

Solving for W 2, we get 

W 2(t) = η2

τ2

Z t

> 0

e− t−ττ2 rtn (τ )rtn (τ )T W 3T ATio dτ 

If τ2 ≫ 1, the steady state weight is well approximated by its mean, 

W 2 ≈ η2Ertn 

rtn rTtn W 3T ATio 

 = η2W 3T ATio (9) Thus, we have 

M = ATio ϕ′

> 1

(hpc )Aio W 3W 3T

If W 3 is random and N3 ≫ 1 or if W 3 has orthogonal rows of equal norm (i.e. the constructed push/pull effector system we use in the model) then W 3W 3T → σ3IdY and thus, 

M = ATio ϕ′

> 1

(hpc )Aio (10) making M positive definite (given ϕ′

> 1

(hpc ) > 0)! Similarly, if Aio has orthogonal columns of equal norm (as in our simulated model) and ϕ1 is linear, M = W 3W 3T -a positive definite matrix !