Title: Temporal Recurrence Favors Fewer Layers

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.12531v1

Published Time: Mon, 14 Sep 2026 00:40:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
Preprint 

# TEMPORAL RECURRENCE FAVORS FEWER LAYERS 

Ivan Anokhin 1,2,3 Johan Obando-Ceron 1,2 Irina Rish 1,2 Sebastian Risi 3

> 1

Mila – Qu´ ebec AI Institute 2Universit´ e de Montr´ eal 3Sakana AI 

{ivan.anokhin,johan.ceron,irina.rish }@mila.quebec sebastianrisi@sakana.ai 

ABSTRACT 

In streaming tasks, recurrent models can carry latent computation across time, allowing each update to build on representations produced earlier. This raises a basic question: once temporal recurrence provides sequential computation across steps, how much depth is still needed within each step? Prior work has shown that recurrence can make shallow models competitive. We instead study this question as a compute-allocation problem, varying within-step depth, expert width, and the number of parallel experts per layer across several compute budgets. For each budget, we compare the best observed recurrent and non-recurrent allocations and the performance they achieve under approximately matched per-step computa-tion. Across Sokoban and autoregressive FineWeb language modeling, we find that temporal recurrence shifts the best observed compute allocation toward sub-stantially fewer layers, with comparable or better performance. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Across many deep learning tasks, models benefit from progressively refining their internal represen-tations through a sequence of latent transformations (He et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2026; Dehghani et al., 2019). This refinement is commonly implemented by stacking layers, allow-ing later layers to build on intermediate states produced by earlier ones. Depth therefore controls one important source of sequential computation available to a model. In natural streaming tasks, sequential computation can also accumulate across time. The model is repeatedly applied as the task unfolds, for example, across tokens in language modeling, frames in video, or observation steps in reinforcement learning. A recurrent model can carry a latent state across these steps, allowing each update to build on computations performed at earlier steps. Recur-rence can therefore do more than preserve information from the past: it can also continue refining representations or plans for future predictions and actions. This temporal recurrence is different from depth recurrence, as used in looped Transformers, where shared blocks are repeatedly applied on the same input before producing an output (Dehghani et al., 2019; Darlow et al., 2026; Jolicoeur-Martineau, 2025; Geiping et al., 2026). Here, computation continues across successive token or environment steps as new inputs arrive. Whether sequential computation can accumulate across external steps depends on the structure of the task. It can do so when several consecutive steps contribute to the same broader problem, allowing computation performed at one step to remain useful later. One favorable setting is when relatively easy predictions or actions come before a harder one: an agent may refine a plan while walking through a corridor, and a language model may continue refining its representation of a passage while generating locally predictable tokens. In contrast, if each step presents a new independent problem that must be solved immediately, earlier computation has no value for later steps. Prior work demonstrates that models can learn useful computation across external steps. State-tracking studies train models to predict the current state after each input operation (Merrill et al., 2024). On difficult permutation-composition tasks, single-layer recurrent models succeed across the tested sequence lengths, whereas Transformers require increasing depth to maintain accuracy. Evi-dence also comes from reinforcement learning, where recurrent agents learn planning-like behavior 

Our code is available at fewer-layers-with-rec. 

1arXiv:2609.12531v1 [cs.LG] 11 Sep 2026 Preprint in fully observed Sokoban environments (Guez et al., 2019). Subsequent analysis shows that their internal plans develop across environment steps and causally influence their actions (Bush et al., 2025). This raises the central question of the paper: How much within-step depth is still needed once temporal recurrence is available? Prior work has shown that recurrence can make shallow models competitive (Merrill et al., 2024; Guez et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2020; Oncescu et al., 2026). We instead formulate this question as a compute-allocation problem, comparing similar recurrent and non-recurrent models. Let S denote the number of sequential stages within that step, and let P

denote the parallel work performed at each stage. The total work per step is then approximately 

W ≈ S · P. At fixed W , allocations with fewer sequential stages spend more work on parallel computation at each stage. We ask whether temporal recurrence changes the best allocation: do recurrent models require a smaller S than non-recurrent models to achieve comparable performance? To realize this comparison, we use recurrent and non-recurrent models with the same three allocation axes, illustrated in Fig. 1. The within-step depth L controls the number of successive stages (layers) 

S. Within each stage, multiple experts are evaluated in parallel and their outputs are combined, allowing P to be increased in two ways: by adding more experts E, or by increasing the hidden dimension d of each expert. The recurrent variant carries a latent state across external steps, while the non-recurrent variant does not. Varying L, E, and d under matched work lets us compare how much within-step depth remains useful with and without temporal recurrence. Our experiments support two main conclusions: • Temporal recurrence shifts the best compute allocation toward fewer layers. Across Sokoban and streamed FineWeb, the best observed recurrent allocations use substantially fewer layers per step than the best non-recurrent allocations, while achieving comparable or better performance under approximately matched per-step work. • Recurrence and parallel capacity play different roles. Increasing per-layer expert count ben-efits both recurrent and non-recurrent models, while gains from additional layers saturate earlier with recurrence. Recurrence therefore reduces the performance cost of using fewer layers, while expert count and width provide useful ways to spend the reallocated compute. More broadly, we hypothesize that temporal recurrence will shift the best compute allocation toward shallower within-step updates in other streaming settings where successive steps contribute to a shared problem and carried state can support continued refinement. A B C             

> 6 layers depth 1 depth 2
> stzt
> st+ 1 yt
> stzt
> st+ 1 yt
> stzt
> st+ 1 yt
> expert block optionally carried state ztencoder features aggregated state

Figure 1: Three example allocations under the same compute budget. The three example architectures schematically use the same approximate work budget but allocate it differently. (A) 

applies six expert blocks sequentially. (B) uses two depth levels, with two wider experts evaluated in parallel at each level. (C) evaluates five experts in parallel within a single depth level. Dashed boxes labeled st and st+1 denote latent state that may be carried between external steps in the recurrent variant. Expert-block area represents approximate computational cost, and the total expert-block area is the same across three examples. 2Preprint 

2 WHY FEWER LAYERS MATTER 

The compute-allocation tradeoff between sequential stages S and parallel work P matters also for latency. Under a fixed work budget, shifting computation from S into P reduces the serial part of the update, potentially decreasing latency if enough hardware parallelism is available. The actual speedups also depend on implementation details, memory bandwidth, and communication overhead. This potential reduction in per-update latency is particularly important for general nonlinear RNNs, whose state updates must generally be unrolled sequentially across tokens during language-model pretraining. Because the latency of each update accumulates at every token in the sequence, deeper updates lengthen both the forward unroll and the backward pass through the sequence. If comparable performance can be preserved while reallocating work from sequential stages S to parallel work 

P , reducing the latency of each update could improve training throughput and make large-scale pretraining of general nonlinear RNNs more practical. Other sequence architectures address this scalability problem by changing how computation is or-ganized across tokens. Transformers process sequence positions in parallel during training, while structured recurrent models, such as Mamba, constrain their state transitions so that they can be evaluated with parallel scans across the sequence (Vaswani et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2021; Gu & Dao, 2023). These gains in temporal parallelism come with an expressivity trade-off. Under standard precision assumptions and complexity-theoretic conjectures, theory places fixed-depth Transform-ers and parallelizable linear recurrent models in computational classes believed to be weaker than attainable by general nonlinear RNNs (Merrill et al., 2024; 2026). This trade-off motivates preserv-ing general nonlinear recurrence and studying whether work can be reallocated from S to P without sacrificing performance, as a potential route to improving training throughput. There are also pieces of evidence supporting the possibility of parallelization in general. Recent transformer studies suggest that some computations normally implemented as strict depth may be more exchangeable than the architecture implies. Sun et al. (2025) find that middle layers of pre-trained transformers share substantial representational structure, and that some tasks tolerate skip-ping, reordering, or parallelizing layers with limited degradation. Freiberger et al. (2024) train vision transformers to tolerate randomized attention-layer execution order, showing that robustness to arbitrary layer order can be learned, though with an accuracy cost. 

3 PRELIMINARIES 

We conduct our study in two settings that support updating a latent state over long external se-quences: deep reinforcement learning and autoregressive language modeling. In both cases, the model repeatedly receives new input, updates an internal state when recurrence is used, and pro-duces an action or prediction. 

Deep Reinforcement Learning. In reinforcement learning, an agent interacts with an environment over timesteps t = 1 , 2, . . . (Sutton et al., 1998; Mnih et al., 2016; Schwarzer et al., 2023). At each step it receives an observation ot, updates an internal latent state st, selects an action at ∼ π(at |

st), and receives a reward rt. The goal is to maximize the expected discounted return, J(π) = 

Eπ

P ∞ 

> t=1

γt−1rt

 , where γ ∈ [0 , 1) is a discount factor that determines the relative importance of immediate and future rewards. The policy π(at | st) maps the current latent state to a distribution over actions, and the expectation is taken over trajectories induced by the policy and environment dynamics. Our experiments use actor–critic agents (Konda & Tsitsiklis, 1999; Mnih et al., 2016). Recurrent architectures are commonly used to maintain belief-like latent states that summarize trajectory history in partially observable environments and support long-horizon decision making (Hausknecht & Stone, 2015; Heess et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Hefny et al., 2018). In this work, we emphasize a complementary use of recurrent computation in reinforcement learning: recurrence can support reasoning-like latent refinement, not merely memory-like tracking. 

Autoregressive Sequence Modeling. Autoregressive sequence modeling aims to predict each to-ken from its preceding context. Given a token sequence x1: T , the objective is to model p(x1: T ) = 

QTt=1 p(xt | x<t ), or equivalently to predict the next-token distribution at each position (Bengio 3Preprint et al., 2003; Vaswani et al., 2017). This requires representations that accumulate and refine contex-tual information over long token streams. Classical recurrent sequence models maintain a latent state across token updates (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) and update that state sequentially during training. Modern long-sequence ar-chitectures often designed to improve training efficiency by enabling parallel scanning computation over sequence positions (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dai et al., 2019; Gu et al., 2021; Gu & Dao, 2023). Our version of the recurrent Transformer is not designed to support parallel scanning; instead, it em-phasizes expressive latent-state updates with feedback connections through the carried state. This is intended to allow computation to compose across successive token steps rather than being concen-trated within a single deep feed-forward pass. 

4 EXPERIMENTAL FRAMEWORK 

We introduce the Parallel Experts framework for studying how compute should be allocated between sequential and parallel computation. It is designed to expose a clean tradeoff between within-step depth and parallel capacity while allowing latent state to be carried across external steps. At each external step, several expert modules read the current input and a shared latent state, compute candi-date updates in parallel, and merge their outputs into the shared state. In recurrent models, the final state is carried to the next external step. This construction exposes three allocation axes: within-step depth L, expert count E per depth level, and expert width d.The depth L counts the number of sequential depth level within one step. The expert count E counts experts evaluated in parallel at each depth level, and d controls per-expert capacity by adjusting ex-pert’s hidden dimension (width). If C(d) is the cost of one expert transformation, the approximated work is 

W ≈ L · E · C(d). (1) We use this proxy to construct matched-budget allocation sweeps that are intended to compare where computation should be placed to maximize the performance for recurrent and non-recurrent archi-tectures. At each environment or sequence step, the model receives an external input xt. Let zt = e(xt)

denote the encoded representation of this external input. At step t, the model also receives an incoming shared latent state s0 

> t

, expert-local activations h0,i t , and architecture-specific memories 

mℓ,i t−1, where ℓ ∈ { 1, . . . , L } indexes depth levels and i ∈ { 1, . . . , E } indexes per depth level parallel experts. Each depth level applies all experts in parallel: 

hℓ,i t , m ℓ,i t = fθℓ,i 



zt, s ℓ−1 

> t

, h ℓ−1,i t , m ℓ,i t−1



, i = 1 , . . . , E, sℓt = 1

√E

> E

X

> i=1

hℓ,i t , ℓ = 1 , . . . , L. 

(2) This normalized sum aggregates expert proposals while keeping the variance approximately the same as the number of contributing experts changes. To maximize the sequential computation avail-able on the carried state, the recurrent variant uses top-down feedback, feeding the final state into the first depth level of the next step (Zilly et al., 2017; Guez et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2020): 

yt = g(sLt ), h0,i t+1 = hL,i t , s0 

> t+1

= sLt . (3) Here yt denotes action logits and a value estimate in reinforcement learning, or next-token logits in language modeling. More specifically, in the LSTM instantiation mℓ,i t corresponds to the cell state cℓ,i t , and in the trans-former — the key–value (KV) cache. Full pseudocode and architecture-specific instantiations are given in Appendix A and alternative aggregation rules are studied in Appendix D. The Parallel Experts framework is intended as a probe framework rather than a claim of architec-tural optimality. We use parallel experts because they expose a clean tradeoff between within-step depth and parallel capacity while optionally allowing a carried latent state. Other MoE mechanisms, including routed MLP experts (Lepikhin et al., 2020), Soft MoE variants (Puigcerver et al., 2023), or alternative recurrent communication schemes, may shift the quantitative frontier, but we expect the qualitative conclusion to stay the same. 4Preprint 

5 EXPERIMENTS 

Our experiments test different compute allocations. The Parallel Experts framework exposes three ways to spend compute: within-step depth L, per-layer expert count E, or width d of each expert. The central question is whether, once recurrent state is carried across the external steps, the best allocations are still require deep sequential computation within each step. For our main experiments we evaluate different allocations in two settings: Sokoban, using the 

Sokoban-v0 environment from Jumanji (Bonnet et al., 2024), and streamed FineWeb language modeling (Penedo et al., 2024). We report episodic return for reinforcement learning and validation cross-entropy loss for language modeling. Unless stated otherwise, in RL each configuration is run with at least three random seeds. Additional implementation details are reported in Appendix G. 5.1 SOKOBAN 

Sokoban is a fully observable puzzle environment in which an agent must push four boxes onto four target locations on a 10 × 10 grid. Levels are procedurally generated, and mistakes can be irreversible: for example, pushing a box into a corner without a target makes the level unsolvable. Planning is therefore important even though the agent observes the entire board at every step. Prior work showed that DRC agents learn planning-like behavior in Sokoban (Guez et al., 2019), and later analysis found that their internal plans develop progressively through recurrence and causally affect their actions (Bush et al., 2025). These properties make Sokoban a natural setting for studying whether temporal recurrence reduces the within-step depth needed for planning. 32 64 128      

> hidden dim
> 1234612
> experts per layer
> Recurrent
> 5.67 7.66 7.75 7.34 7.93 6.30
> 8.95 7.95 9.21
> 32 64 128
> hidden dim
> 1234612
> Feedforward
> -9.17 -8.94 -9.08 -2.25 -2.05 2.94
> 3.70 5.90 5.49
> −7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5
> Mean return
> L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 L=16 top 3

Figure 2: Compute allocations in Sokoban under the small per-step budget. We compare recur-rent and non-recurrent ConvLSTM agents across different compute allocations, varying within-step depth L, per-layer expert count E, and expert width d under approximately matched compute budget. Higher mean return is better. The best observed recurrent allocation uses four layers and achieves a higher return than the best non-recurrent allocation, which uses eight layers. We use a DRC-inspired architecture with ConvLSTM experts (Guez et al., 2019), organized accord-ing to our Parallel Experts framework. The original DRC setup combines temporal recurrence with depth-recurrence, repeated passes through the recurrent stack on the same observation. To focus on temporal recurrence, we instead make a single pass through the L depth levels per environment step, without additional internal looping. We compare models trained with state carried across envi-ronment steps against models trained without carried state, keeping the remaining architecture and training setup the same. For both variants, we vary within-step depth L, expert count E, and expert width d under approximately matched per-step compute budgets. This comparison tests whether temporal recurrence changes how compute is best allocated between within-step depth and parallel capacity. Fig. 2 shows the allocation sweeps for both variants under the small compute budget. With recur-rence, the performance saturates at L = 4 , while the non-recurrent version saturates at depth 8 with much worse performance. Temporal recurrence changes not only the achieved performance but also the preferred compute allocation, favoring fewer sequential stages and more parallel capacity. 5Preprint 1 2 4 8 16         

> Max within-step depth
> −5 0510
> mean return
> Sokoban
> 124816 32
> Max within-step depth
> 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9
> validation loss
> FineWeb
> large budget / long context small budget long context medium budget long context Recurrent Feedforward

Figure 3: Within-step depth saturation for recurrent and non-recurrent models. We report the best result among tested allocations with L or fewer within-step layers, within each compute budget. 

Left : Sokoban mean episodic return with one standard error across three seeds. Right : FineWeb validation loss, lower is better. Recurrent models reach their best observed performance with 2–4

layers, while non-recurrent models benefit from greater depth. We repeat the allocation sweeps at medium and large compute budgets. Fig. 3 summarizes all three budgets, reporting the best observed mean return over expert counts, widths, and depths up to L.Across the tested budgets, recurrent performance saturates by depth 2-4, whereas non-recurrent models benefit from greater within-step depth, for example, still improving at a within-step depth of 16 under the large budget. At the same time, recurrent model performance is better across all settings, and larger budgets continue to improve both architectures at every tested within-step depth, showing that additional parallel compute remains a useful scaling axis across different configura-tions. The full medium- and large-budget sweeps are reported in Appendix J. 0 5 10 15 19 

> Environment step
> 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
> Agent move recall
> L=2 L=4

Figure 4: Agent-move recall. The four layer model initially has more complete plans, but the two layer model catches up over the next few environment steps. Both mod-els achieve almost identical perfor-mance. For a more direct architectural comparison, we also test Con-vGLU models, whose experts apply a 3 × 3 convolution fol-lowed by GLU activation. These models omit the LSTM cell-state machinery retained in the non-recurrent ConvLSTM baseline. Here, the only architectural difference is one extra projection in the recurrent variant, feeding the previous step’s final residual stream into the first depth level. We observe the same earlier depth saturation with recurrence under this single architectural intervention (see Appendix K). To examine how planning develops at different within-step depths, we apply the spatial probes of Bush et al. (2025) to the final residual representations of two large budget recur-rent models with L = 2 and L = 4 . The probes predict the direction of the agent’s movements in each spatial location. Fig. 4 compares recall across environment steps, with thresh-olds calibrated to approximately 93% precision. The L = 4 

model initially has higher recall, but the L = 2 model catches up over the next few environment steps, after which both maintain similar recall. Both models also have almost identical performance. This pattern is consistent with the shallower model compensat-ing for less planning within each update by continuing the computation across environment steps, catching up early enough to preserve task performance. Full probing details and additional depth comparisons are provided in Appendix F. 5.2 LANGUAGE MODELING 

We next test whether the compute-allocation trends observed in Sokoban extend to language mod-eling. We train recurrent and non-recurrent models for next-token prediction on approximately one billion tokens from FineWeb and compare validation loss under approximately matched per-token compute budgets. We use Transformer blocks within our Parallel Experts framework, with the non-recurrent model reducing to a standard Transformer when E = 1 . The recurrent variant feeds the 6Preprint final residual stream into the first layer at the next token step, with additional adjustments for stability and memory efficiency described in Appendix A. During training, recurrent models process continuous token streams, carrying their state and slid-ing window KV caches across training sequences and resetting them only at shard boundaries. Non-recurrent models are trained on independent training sequences, allowing parallel computa-tion across token positions. We use fixed KV cache lengths of 128 and 1024 for recurrent models against non-recurrent training sequence lengths of 256 and 2048 tokens, respectively, approximately matching the average attention-context length during training. Both variants use the same total training-token budget and number of tokens per optimizer update. At evaluation, both variants pro-cess the validation stream continuously using sliding-window KV caches of the same length ( 128 or 

1024 ). Further streaming implementation details are provided in Appendix B. 

Results. Fig. 5 shows the allocation sweeps under the small compute budget with a 128 -token attention window. The recurrent model reaches a validation loss of approximately 3.51 with only two depth levels ( L = 2 ), comparable to the best non-recurrent allocation at L = 16 . As in Sokoban, the preferred allocation shifts toward fewer sequential stages and greater parallel capacity when recurrence is available. 768 960 1152 1344 1536 1728 2112        

> hidden dim
> 123456816
> experts per layer
> Recurrent Transformer
> 3.62 3.53
> 3.51
> 3.57
> 3.51
> 3.62 3.52 3.62 3.52
> 3.52
> 3.62 3.55 3.69
> 768 960 1152 1344 1536 1728 2112
> hidden dim
> 123456816
> Transformer
> 3.97 3.65 3.57
> 3.54 3.51
> 3.64 3.96 3.64 3.97 3.64
> 3.56
> 3.98 3.67 4.03
> 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0
> validation loss
> L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 L=16 top 3

Figure 5: Compute allocations in FineWeb under the small per-token budget. We compare recurrent and non-recurrent Transformer allocations trained for next-token prediction on approx-imately one billion FineWeb tokens. Validation cross-entropy is shown; lower is better. Under approximately matched per-token work, the recurrent model reaches a validation loss of approxi-mately 3.51 with two layers, comparable to the best observed non-recurrent allocation, which uses sixteen layers. We extend the comparison to a medium compute budget and to the models trained and evaluated with an average 1024 -token attention window. Fig. 3 summarizes these settings, reporting the lowest validation loss among allocations with depth at most L. Across the tested settings, recurrent models reach their best observed loss at L = 2 or 4, whereas non-recurrent models continue to improve up to L = 16 or 32 . Although the preferred depth depends on the setting, recurrent models consistently achieve comparable validation loss with substantially less within-step depth. 5.3 WHAT MAKES THE EARLIER SATURATION WORK ?The early saturation appears to reflect two approximately separable effects. In Fig. 6, increasing per-layer expert count improves both recurrent and non-recurrent models, suggesting that parallel capacity is broadly useful regardless of recurrence. In contrast, the depth-response curve depends strongly on recurrence: non-recurrent performance performance is much more sensitive to reducing 

L, whereas recurrent models saturate at substantially shallower within-step depth. Thus, recurrence primarily lowers the cost of reallocating compute away from depth, while experts/width provide a useful parallel place for that compute. Finally, parallel experts must communicate through shared state. In the communication-radius ablation (Appendix E), Full shared-state access performs best while the narrower communication radii lower performance monotonically. Interestingly, Sokoban performance continues to improve beyond the eight-expert regime explored in prior deep RL Soft MoE work (Obando Ceron et al., 2024; Sokar et al., 2025). 7Preprint −5 0510         

> L = 1 L = 2 L = 4 L = 2 L = 4 L = 8
> Sokoban
> Recurrent Feedforward
> 14816 32
> experts per layer
> −9.5 −9.0 −8.5
> L = 1
> 12348
> experts per layer
> 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2
> validation loss
> L = 1 L = 1
> L = 2 L = 2 L = 4
> L = 8
> FineWeb
> L = 4,8
> Recurrent Transformer Transformer
> mean return

Figure 6: Scaling within-step depth and experts per layer. Color denotes within-step depth L.Increasing experts per layer benefits both recurrent and non-recurrent models, while gains from additional within-step depth saturate earlier with recurrence. 

6 RELATED WORK 

Temporal Recurrence and Model Depth. Several prior works provide evidence that temporal recurrence across external steps, such as token steps in streamed language modeling or environment steps in reinforcement learning, can make shallower recurrent neural networks more competitive with standard feed-forward architectures without temporal recurrence. Feedback Transformer (Fan et al., 2020) expose top-level representations from previous tokens to the current token’s computa-tion and show that such feedback makes shallow models with fewer parameters more competitive with standard Transformers that have more layers. In reinforcement learning, DRC (Guez et al., 2019) carries recurrent state across steps of the Sokoban environment and outperforms deep feed-forward baselines. A closely related classical work, RHN (Zilly et al., 2017), studies how to scale within-step recurrent depth under a fixed pa-rameter budget by trading off depth against width, with depth saturating at approximately 8–9 levels. Importantly, however, compute still grows substantially with depth in the RHN setup, even though the parameter count is held fixed. Similarly, recent recurrent Transformer work (Oncescu et al., 2026) finds favorable depth–width tradeoffs under a fixed parameter budget. In contrast, our work keeps compute approximately fixed , rather than parameter count, and studies the tradeoff between within-step depth, expert width, and per-layer expert count for recurrent and non-recurrent models. In this sense, our work complements and extends prior studies. 

Depth Recurrence, Mixture-of-Experts and Compute Allocation. A long line of work studies neural computation as an iterative refinement process in which representations are progressively updated through recurrent/looping transformations on the same input, rather than being computed in a single feed-forward pass. Universal Transformers (Dehghani et al., 2019) reformulated Trans-former layers as recurrent updates applied across depth, while Adaptive Computation Time (Graves, 2016) and PonderNet (Banino et al., 2021) explored dynamically allocating additional sequential computation to difficult inputs. A few recent works have also combined depth recurrence with Mixture-of-Experts approaches, mo-tivated by the lack of parameter capacity in these looping architectures; examples include recurrent modular architectures such as Recurrent Independent Mechanisms (RIMs) (Goyal et al., 2019) and recurrent MoE systems such as MoEUT (Csord´ as et al., 2024). Mixture-of-experts (MoE) architec-tures scale model capacity through conditional or parallel computation (Jacobs et al., 1991; Jordan & Jacobs, 1994). Modern sparse MoE systems demonstrate that parameter count can scale substan-tially while keeping per-token computation nearly constant (Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2022; Du et al., 2022). Most prior work integrates experts inside fixed-depth feed-forward architectures, where the dominant scaling axis remains serial layer composition. Other works study improved routing and expert utilization, including differentiable aggregation mecha-nisms such as Soft MoE (Puigcerver et al., 2023; Obando Ceron et al., 2024; Willi et al., 2024). In our work, we focus mainly on temporal recurrence rather than depth recurrence, and MoE appears in our framework as a way to study a sequential-to-parallel compute allocation problem . This per-8Preprint spective is also related to broader work on depth–width tradeoffs and compute-optimal scaling (Lu et al., 2017; Cheng et al., 2017; Hoffmann et al., 2022). 

7 DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS 

Our results suggest that temporal recurrence does not eliminate sequential computation, but changes where it occurs. Non-recurrent models must complete the computation required for each output within the current step, whereas recurrent models can preserve intermediate representations and continue refining them as new inputs arrive. In the settings studied here, this shifts the best observed compute allocation away from within-step depth and toward parallel capacity. Our Sokoban probing results are consistent with this interpretation: the shallower recurrent agent initially forms less com-plete plans than the deeper agent, but catches up over subsequent environment steps while achieving comparable task performance. This tradeoff should depend on the structure of the task. Computation can accumulate across time only when consecutive inputs contribute to a shared problem and the carried state preserves useful intermediate computation. We therefore expect recurrence to reduce the need for within-step depth most clearly in settings with persistent context, progressively evolving representations, or opportuni-ties to refine decisions over multiple steps. The same benefit may not arise when each input presents an independent problem, when every decision must be solved immediately, or when the recurrent state is too limited to retain useful intermediate information. Our empirical study covers two domains, a finite set of architectures, and a restricted range of compute budgets, training durations, and task difficulties. The reported allocations are therefore the best among those evaluated, rather than globally compute-optimal configurations. Isolating the effect of recurrence also requires compromises in architectural parity. ConvLSTM contains state machinery that may favor the recurrent variant, while ConvGLU provides a more direct comparison in which recurrence is introduced through feedback from the previous step’s final representation. Similarly, recurrent Transformers require stabilization and memory-management choices that are absent from the standard non-recurrent baseline. Changes in architecture, scale, or architecture-specific tuning may shift the preferred allocation for either model class. Optimization may also contribute to the earlier depth saturation observed in recurrent models. We train recurrent models using truncated backpropagation through time, which may make credit as-signment through deep recurrent updates more difficult (Bengio et al., 1994; Pascanu et al., 2013). Non-recurrent models constructed from similar blocks continue to benefit from greater depth, ar-guing against a general inability to optimize deep networks, but this does not rule out optimization difficulties specific to the recurrent setting. Finally, our work proxy captures approximately matched computation rather than realized hardware efficiency. Although reallocating computation from depth to parallel capacity shortens the serial path through each update, actual latency depends on hardware utilization, memory bandwidth, kernel efficiency, and communication overhead. We provide pre-liminary latency and throughput measurements in Appendix H, but leave a comprehensive systems evaluation to future work. 

8 CONCLUSION 

Across Sokoban and streamed FineWeb, temporal recurrence shifts the best observed compute allo-cation toward substantially fewer layers per step, with comparable or better performance than non-recurrent models under approximately matched per-step work. For example, in the small-budget language modeling FineWeb comparison, a recurrent model with L = 2 reaches a validation loss comparable to the best non-recurrent allocation at L = 16 . Recurrence and parallel capacity play distinct roles in this shift: recurrence reduces the performance cost of using fewer layers, while per-layer expert count and width provide useful ways to spend the reallocated work. Increasing parallel capacity remains useful both with and without recurrence. Our Sokoban decoding analysis is consistent with computation being redistributed across time, with the shallower model catching up in planning while achieving comparable task performance. Over-all, our results support the broader hypothesis that temporal recurrence can shift the best compute allocation toward fewer layers per step in other streaming tasks where useful computation can accu-9Preprint mulate across time. This motivates exploring shallower, more parallel updates as a potential route to reducing latency and improving training throughput, making general nonlinear recurrent models more practical at scale. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We acknowledge the support from the Canada CIFAR AI Chair Program and from the Canada Excellence Research Chairs Program. The research was enabled in part by computational resources provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada and Mila Quebec AI Institute. IA thanks Andrei Mircea Romascanu for helpful discussions and comments. We thank the Frontier Intelligence Group at Sakana AI for a helpful discussion and suggestions on the paper title, especially Ciaran Regan, whose suggestions helped shape the final title. We would also like to thank the Python community (Van Rossum & Drake Jr, 1995; Oliphant, 2007) for developing tools that enabled this work, including NumPy (Harris et al., 2020), Matplotlib (Hunter, 2007), Jupyter (Kluyver et al., 2016), and Pandas (McKinney, 2013). 

REFERENCES 

Andrea Banino, Jan Balaguer, and Charles Blundell. Pondernet: Learning to ponder. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05407 , 2021. Yoshua Bengio, Patrice Simard, and Paolo Frasconi. Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is difficult. IEEE transactions on neural networks , 5(2):157–166, 1994. Yoshua Bengio, R´ ejean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and Christian Jauvin. A neural probabilistic language model. Journal of machine learning research , 3(Feb):1137–1155, 2003. Cl´ ement Bonnet, Daniel Luo, Donal Byrne, Shikha Surana, Sasha Abramowitz, Paul Duck-worth, Vincent Coyette, Laurence Illing Midgley, Elshadai Tegegn, Tristan Kalloniatis, Omayma Mahjoub, Matthew Macfarlane, Andries P. Smit, Nathan Grinsztajn, Rapha¨ el Boige, Cemlyn N. Waters, Mohamed A. Mimouni, Ulrich A. Mbou Sob, Ruan de Kock, Siddarth Singh, Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Victor Le, Arnu Pretorius, and Alexandre Laterre. Jumanji: a diverse suite of scalable reinforcement learning environments in JAX. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=C4CxQmp9wc .Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual , 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/ 1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html .Thomas Bush, Stephen Chung, Usman Anwar, Adri` a Garriga-Alonso, and David Krueger. Inter-preting emergent planning in model-free reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 82115–82197, 2025. Yu Cheng, Duo Wang, Pan Zhou, and Tao Zhang. A survey of model compression and acceleration for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.09282 , 2017. Stephen Chung, Ivan Anokhin, and David Krueger. Thinker: Learning to plan and act. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:22896–22933, 2023. 10 Preprint R´ obert Csord´ as, Kazuki Irie, J¨ urgen Schmidhuber, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. Moeut: Mixture-of-experts universal transformers. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 37, pp. 28589–28614. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.52202/ 079017-0897. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/ 2024/file/321387ba926b8e58d3591c0aeb52ffc2-Paper-Conference.pdf .Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime G Carbonell, Quoc Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Proceedings of the 57th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics , pp. 2978–2988, 2019. Luke Darlow, Ciaran Regan, Sebastian Risi, Jeffrey Seely, and Llion Jones. Continuous thought machines. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:21548–21594, 2026. Mostafa Dehghani, Stephan Gouws, Oriol Vinyals, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Lukasz Kaiser. Universal transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=HyzdRiR9Y7 .Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lepikhin, Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu, Orhan Firat, Barret Zoph, Liam Fedus, Maarten P. Bosma, Zongwei Zhou, Tao Wang, Yu Emma Wang, Kellie Webster, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson, Kath-leen S. Meier-Hellstern, Toju Duke, Lucas Dixon, Kun Zhang, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, and Claire Cui. Glam: Efficient scaling of language models with mixture-of-experts. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesv´ ari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 5547–5569. PMLR, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/du22c.html .Angela Fan, Thibaut Lavril, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Addressing some limitations of transformers with feedback memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09402 , 2020. William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(120):1–39, 2022. Matthias Freiberger, Peter Kun, Anders Sundnes Løvlie, and Sebastian Risi. Layershuffle: En-hancing robustness in vision transformers by randomizing layer execution order. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04513 , 2024. Jonas Geiping, Sean McLeish, Neel Jain, John Kirchenbauer, Siddharth Singh, Brian Bartoldson, Bhavya Kailkhura, Abhinav Bhatele, and Tom Goldstein. Scaling up test-time compute with latent reasoning: A recurrent depth approach. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38: 41340–41391, 2026. Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Jordan Hoffmann, Shagun Sodhani, Sergey Levine, Yoshua Bengio, and Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf. Recurrent independent mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10893 ,2019. Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08983 , 2016. Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752 , 2023. Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher R´ e. Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured state spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00396 , 2021. Arthur Guez, Mehdi Mirza, Karol Gregor, Rishabh Kabra, S´ ebastien Racani` ere, Theophane Weber, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Laurent Orseau, Tom Eccles, Greg Wayne, David Silver, and Tim-othy P. Lillicrap. An investigation of model-free planning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA , volume 97 of Proceedings of Ma-chine Learning Research , pp. 2464–2473. PMLR, 2019. URL http://proceedings.mlr. press/v97/guez19a.html .11 Preprint Charles R Harris, K Jarrod Millman, St´ efan J Van Der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J Smith, et al. Array program-ming with numpy. Nature , 585(7825):357–362, 2020. Matthew J Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps. In 

AAAI fall symposia , volume 45, pp. 141, 2015. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 770–778, 2016. Nicolas Heess, Jonathan J Hunt, Timothy P Lillicrap, and David Silver. Memory-based control with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.04455 , 2015. Ahmed Hefny, Zita Marinho, Wen Sun, Siddhartha Srinivasa, and Geoffrey Gordon. Recurrent predictive state policy networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1949– 1958. PMLR, 2018. Sepp Hochreiter and J¨ urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation , 9(8): 1735–1780, 1997. Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hen-nigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre. Training compute-optimal large language models. CoRR , abs/2203.15556, 2022. doi: 10.48550/ ARXIV.2203.15556. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.15556 .John D Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in science & engineering , 9 (03):90–95, 2007. Robert A Jacobs, Michael I Jordan, Steven J Nowlan, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of local experts. Neural computation , 3(1):79–87, 1991. Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau. Less is more: Recursive reasoning with tiny networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04871 , 2025. Keller Jordan, Jeremy Bernstein, Brendan Rappazzo, @fernbear.bsky.social, Boza Vlado, You Jiacheng, Franz Cesista, Braden Koszarsky, and @Grad62304977. modded-nanogpt: Speedrunning the nanogpt baseline, 2024. URL https://github.com/KellerJordan/ modded-nanogpt .Michael I Jordan and Robert A Jacobs. Hierarchical mixtures of experts and the em algorithm. 

Neural computation , 6(2):181–214, 1994. Andrej Karpathy. NanoGPT. https://github.com/karpathy/nanoGPT , 2022. Thomas Kluyver, Benjain Ragan-Kelley, Fernando P´ erez, Brian Granger, Matthias Bussonnier, Jonathan Frederic, Kyle Kelley, Jessica Hamrick, Jason Grout, Sylvain Corlay, Paul Ivanov, Dami´ an Avila, Safia Abdalla, Carol Willing, and Jupyter Development Team. Jupyter Note-books—a publishing format for reproducible computational workflows. In IOS Press , pp. 87–90. 2016. doi: 10.3233/978-1-61499-649-1-87. Vijay Konda and John Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems , 12, 1999. Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen, Orhan Firat, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and Zhifeng Chen. Gshard: Scaling giant models with conditional computation and automatic sharding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16668 , 2020. Zhou Lu, Hongming Pu, Feicheng Wang, Zhiqiang Hu, and Liwei Wang. The expressive power of neural networks: A view from the width. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. 12 Preprint Wes McKinney. Python for Data Analysis: Data Wrangling with Pandas, NumPy, and IPython . O’Reilly Media, 1 edition, February 2013. ISBN 9789351100065. URL 

http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=citeulike07-20& path=ASIN/1449319793 .William Merrill, Jackson Petty, and Ashish Sabharwal. The illusion of state in state-space models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08819 , 2024. William Merrill, Hongjian Jiang, Yanhong Li, Anthony Lin, and Ashish Sabharwal. Why are linear rnns more parallelizable? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03612 , 2026. Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1928–1937. PmLR, 2016. Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Ghada Sokar, Timon Willi, Clare Lyle, Jesse Farebrother, Jakob Nico-laus Foerster, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Doina Precup, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Mix-tures of experts unlock parameter scaling for deep RL. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (eds.), 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 38520–38540. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. URL 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/obando-ceron24b.html .Travis E. Oliphant. Python for scientific computing. Computing in Science & Engineering , 9(3): 10–20, 2007. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.58. Costin-Andrei Oncescu, Depen Morwani, Samy Jelassi, Alexandru Meterez, Mujin Kwun, and Sham Kakade. The recurrent transformer: Greater effective depth and efficient decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.21215 , 2026. Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1310–1318. Pmlr, 2013. Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydl´ ıcek, Loubna Ben Allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin A. Raffel, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale. In Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey, Danielle Bel-grave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37: Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 -15, 2024 , 2024. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/ hash/370df50ccfdf8bde18f8f9c2d9151bda-Abstract-Datasets_and_ Benchmarks_Track.html .Joan Puigcerver, Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Basil Mustafa, and Neil Houlsby. From sparse to soft mixtures of experts. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Max Schwarzer, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, Marc G Bellemare, Rishabh Agar-wal, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Bigger, better, faster: Human-level Atari with human-level effi-ciency. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill, Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato, and Jonathan Scarlett (eds.), Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 30365–30380. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/schwarzer23a.html .Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538 , 2017. Ghada Sokar, Johan S Obando Ceron, Aaron Courville, Hugo Larochelle, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Don’t flatten, tokenize! unlocking the key to softmoe’s efficacy in deep rl. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 47170–47191, 2025. Qi Sun, Marc Pickett, Aakash Kumar Nain, and Llion Jones. Transformer layers as painters. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 39, pp. 25219–25227, 2025. 13 Preprint Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, and Andrew Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction ,volume 1. MIT press Cambridge, 1998. Mohammad Taufeeque, Philip Quirke, Maximilian Li, Chris Cundy, Aaron David Tucker, Adam Gleave, and Adri` a Garriga-Alonso. Planning in a recurrent neural network that plays sokoban. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15421 , 2024. Guido Van Rossum and Fred L Drake Jr. Python reference manual . Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica Amsterdam, 1995. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 30, 2017. Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos, Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763 , 2016. Kevin Wang, Ishaan Javali, Michał Bortkiewicz, Tomasz Trzcinski, and Benjamin Eysenbach. 1000 layer networks for self-supervised rl: Scaling depth can enable new goal-reaching capabilities. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:157643–157670, 2026. Timon Willi, Johan Samir Obando Ceron, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, and Pablo Samuel Castro. Mixture of experts in a mixture of RL settings. In Reinforcement Learning Conference , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=5FFO6RlOEm .Julian Georg Zilly, Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Jan Koutnık, and J¨ urgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent highway networks. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 4189–4198. PMLR, 2017. 14 Preprint 

# APPENDIX CONTENTS 

A Architectures 16 

A.1 LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 A.2 Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 A.3 Recurrent Transformer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 

B FineWeb Streaming Implementation 18 C Sokoban Solve Rate Results 19 D Aggregation Ablations 20 E Communication Radius 21 F Sokoban Planning Analysis 22 G Implementation Details and Hyperparameters Used in Experiments 23 

G.1 Compute Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 

H Latency and Training Throughput 24 

H.1 Inference Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 H.2 Training Throughput . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

I FineWeb Fixed-Compute Sweeps 25 J Sokoban Fixed-Compute Sweeps 26 K ConvGLU Sokoban 27 

15 Preprint 

A ARCHITECTURES 

Figure 7: Architecture. Each column is one external step. At every step, a fresh input xt is encoded, within-step experts update the carried state, a head produces output yt, and the top state is optionally routed into the next external step in case of recurrence. All architecture variants follow the same pattern: an external input is encoded into z, a shared latent state s is read by several experts in parallel, expert outputs are aggregated, and the updated shared state is carried forward through the external sequence in the recurrent version, as illustrated in Fig. 7. The reinforcement-learning models use LSTM experts, while the FineWeb next-token model uses transformer experts. Figs. 8 and 9 then specialize the expert block for reinforcement learning and FineWeb next-token prediction, and Algorithms 1–2 give the high-level update rules. A.1 LSTM Fig. 8 illustrates one depth level with parallel LSTM experts used in reinforcement learning exper-iments. Each expert receives the encoded observation z, the shared latent state s, and its own local LSTM tensors (hi, c i). The experts are evaluated in parallel. At each depth level, their hidden out-puts are aggregated into the shared state s, which is passed to the next depth level; the policy and value heads read s after the final depth level. In the non-recurrent LSTM version, all ci are always zero, and hi and s inputs for the experts in the first depth level are omitted. 

Algorithm 1 Parallel experts LSTM  

> 1:

Encode external input z ← e(xt) 

> 2:

Receive or initialize shared latent state s, rolling hidden states h1: E , and cells c1: L 

> 1: E
> 3:

for within-step depth layer ℓ = 1 , . . . , L do  

> 4:

for all experts i = 1 , . . . , E in parallel do  

> 5:

(hi, c ℓi ) ← fθℓi (z, s, h i, c ℓi ) 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

s ← A(h1, . . . , h E ) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

(πt, V t) ← head( s) 

> 10:

Return πt, Vt, updated shared latent state s, and LSTM states h1: E , c 1: L

> 1: E

Algorithm 1 describes the same computation across L sequential depth levels. The cell cℓi is local to expert i at depth level ℓ.16 Preprint LSTM                   

> parallel LSTM experts
> zsh1,c1h1,c1
> zsh2,c2h2,c2
> zsh3,c3h3,c3
> s
> V
> Aggregation
> z: encoder features s: shared latent state (h,c): local LSTM tensors/memories
> xL depth levels
> LSTM 1
> LSTM 2
> LSTM 3

Figure 8: Parallel experts LSTM. Each LSTM expert receives encoder features z, the shared latent state s, hi from the previous depth level or external step and its local recurrent context ci. At each depth level, expert outputs are aggregated into the shared latent state s, which is passed to the next depth level. The policy and value heads read s after the final depth level. The Sokoban actor–critic use a spatial recurrence. The observation encoder produces a spatial fea-ture map, and the shared latent state keeps the same board-like spatial structure. The encoder is RMS-normalized over the spatial dimensions. At each environment step, recurrent convolutional LSTM (ConvLSTM) experts read the encoded observation, the shared spatial state, and the incom-ing hidden state and their previous cell states. The ConvLSTM gates are produced by a 3 × 3

convolution followed by RMS normalization of the gate preactivations. Expert hidden outputs are aggregated into the shared state, which is carried to the next environment step in case of recurrence or to the next depth level. The Sokoban head aggregates the spatial expert output with attention pooling and global average pooling, applies a dense GLU, and then uses separate linear projections for action logits and the scalar value estimate. A.2 TRANSFORMER 

The FineWeb architecture uses standard NanoGPT baseline (Vaswani et al., 2017; Karpathy, 2022; Jordan et al., 2024) components: learned token embeddings, grouped-query attention with RoPE, RMS-normalized queries and keys, a squared-ReLU feed-forward block, final RMSNorm, an LM head, and logit soft-capping. To make a parallel expert version of this non-recurrent Transformer we simply execute E transformer blocks in parallel and then merge the outputs using the aggregation in Eq. 2. A.3 RECURRENT TRANSFORMER 

To make the recurrent version of it we were needed to introduce two changes in addition to recur-rence to stabilize the training, and address memory constrains. We have tried to keep these modi-fications minimal. First, to stabilize the training each block at all depth levels recieves embeddings of the current token in addition to residual stream. Plus, the output of each expert is normilized with parameter-free RMSNorm. The second addition is that we share the KV cache between ex-perts at each depth level. In our experiments, sharing the KV cache increases validation loss by approximately 0.02, but helps greatly to reduce memory pressure and increases throughput. In detail, in the parallel expert Recurrent Transformer each expert reads the token embedding z

and shared latent state s, forms an expert input, and prepares ki, v i, q i. The per-expert queries remain separate, while the key–value proposals are aggregated across experts into one shared key– value entry. This entry is pushed into a rolling KV cache (K, V ) local to that depth level, so all experts at that level attend to the same shared KV cache. The rolling KV cache is a fixed-length FIFO buffer: each new aggregated KV entry is appended, and the oldest entry is discarded once 17 Preprint the buffer is full. The expert attention outputs pass through the transformer feed-forward path, and RMS normalization, producing expert outputs hi that are aggregated into the next shared latent state. After the final depth level, the shared state is read by the head. The KV caches and shared state are then carried forward by the streamed-document language-modeling pipeline. 

Algorithm 2 Parallel experts Recurrent Transformer 

1: Encode token z ← e(xt)

2: Receive or initialize shared latent state s and FIFO KV caches (K1: L, V 1: L)

3: for within-step depth level ℓ = 1 , . . . , L do 

4: for all experts i = 1 , . . . , E in parallel do 

5: (ki, v i, q i) ← pθℓi (z, s )

6: end for 

7: k ← A(k1, . . . , k E )

8: v ← A(v1, . . . , v E )

9: (Kℓ, V ℓ) ← push FIFO  (Kℓ, V ℓ), (k, v )

10: for all experts i = 1 , . . . , E in parallel do 

11: hi ← gθℓi (qi, K ℓ, V ℓ)

12: end for 

13: s ← A(h1, . . . , h E )

14: end for 

15: logits t ← head( s)

16: Return next-token logits logits t, shared latent state s, and KV caches (K1: L, V 1: L)Recurrent Transformer                          

> parallel Transformer experts
> shared
> K,V
> zsk1,v1q1h1
> zsk2,v2q2h2
> zsk3,v3q3h3
> slogits
> Aggregation
> z: token embedding s: shared latent state (K,V): shared rolling memory hi: expert output
> xL depth levels
> Aggregation + Push
> attn 1+ FFN 1
> attn 2+ FFN 2
> attn 3+ FFN 3

Figure 9: Parallel experts Recurrent Transformer. A token embedding z and shared latent state s

enter each depth level. Recurrent Transformer experts run in parallel, propose (ki, v i, q i), aggregate and push (ki, v i) into a shared rolling (K, V ), then each expert attends to that KV cache, and pro-duces output hi. Expert outputs aggregate into s, which is read by the language-model head. 

B FINE WEB STREAMING IMPLEMENTATION 

For a shard with S tokens and global batch size B, the loader partitions the shard into B contiguous streams of length ⌊S/B ⌋. Batch slot b reads only from stream b. At stream position q, slot b reads a window of length T + 1 , where T is the training sequence length. The first T tokens are inputs and the next T shifted tokens are labels. The recurrent state is also organized by batch slot. It is reset at the first window of a shard, carried across later adjacent windows in the same slot, and reset again when a new shard begins. 18 Preprint 

Algorithm 3 FineWeb shard streaming  

> 1:

Let B be the global batch size and T the training sequence length  

> 2:

for all training shards with S tokens do  

> 3:

Split the shard into B contiguous streams of length ⌊S/B ⌋ 

> 4:

Initialize recurrent state for all batch slots  

> 5:

for q = 0 , T, 2T, . . . while all streams have T + 1 tokens available do  

> 6:

for all batch slots b = 1 , . . . , B do  

> 7:

wb ← tokens from stream b at positions q : q + T + 1  

> 8:

xb ← wb[0 : T ], yb ← wb[1 : T + 1]  

> 9:

Reset slot state only if q = 0  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Compute next-token loss and updated recurrent state on (x1: B , y 1: B ) 

> 12:

Update parameters; carry the detached recurrent state to the next window  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

end for 

C SOKOBAN SOLVE RATE RESULTS 

We evaluate Sokoban policies trained on 50M environment steps on the 1,000-level 

unfiltered-test split with ConvLSTM architecture. For each fixed-compute budget and within-step depth L ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 }, we select the configuration with the highest mean training return. All selected policies act greedily for at most 120 steps per test level. Table 1 reports the results. Table 1: Sokoban ConvLSTM Unfiltered Test solve rates. Mean and standard deviation over three seeds are reported. State denotes whether recurrent state is carried or reset at every environment step.                                                                                                                                                                                             

> Recurrent Budget LEdUnfiltered Test (%) small 11128 86 .03 ±3.71
> small 2264 91 .93 ±1.08
> small 4164 92 .70 ±1.04
> small 8232 86 .13 ±2.40
> small 16 132 79 .00 ±0.96
> medium 11256 93 .23 ±1.06
> medium 22128 96 .20 ±0.70
> medium 41128 96 .67 ±0.67
> medium 8264 93 .40 ±3.84
> medium 16 164 88 .67 ±1.72
> large 14512 96 .23 ±0.91
> large 28256 98 .47 ±0.15
> large 41512 98 .70 ±0.17
> large 87128 95 .67 ±1.44
> large 16 13 64 88 .57 ±3.80
> Feedforward Budget LEdUnfiltered Test (%) small 1464 3.20 ±0.00
> small 2264 30 .50 ±0.96
> small 4164 59 .63 ±3.83
> small 8232 74 .63 ±3.91
> small 16 132 73 .23 ±2.97
> medium 14128 3.93 ±0.12
> medium 22128 39 .03 ±0.78
> medium 41128 68 .93 ±1.95
> medium 8264 86 .73 ±1.34
> medium 16 164 84 .10 ±4.32
> large 158 128 4.57 ±0.50
> large 22512 52 .93 ±0.68
> large 44256 78 .47 ±0.55
> large 87128 92 .00 ±0.26
> large 16 13 64 93 .00 ±0.40

For external context, Chung et al. (2023) report Thinker and a reproduction of DRC (Guez et al., 2019) on the same unfiltered Sokoban test set after 50 million real-environment frames. Taufeeque et al. (2024) report DRC(3,3) and ResNet point estimates after two billion environment steps on the same split with the same 120-step episode limit. 19 Preprint Table 2: Reported Sokoban baselines on Unfiltered Test. The 50M-frame entries are the mean with one standard deviation reported by Chung et al. (2023); the 2B-step entries are reported by Taufeeque et al. (2024).               

> Method Training steps Unfiltered Test Thinker 50M 94 .5±0.8
> DRC(3,3) (Thinker reproduction) 50M 91 .3±1.2
> DRC(3,3) 2B 99 .3
> ResNet 2B 97 .9

D AGGREGATION ABLATIONS 

Aggregation rules. Let hi denote the output of expert i. For routed variants, αi denotes the learned softmax routing coefficient for expert i. The four ablations choices are mean pooling, sqrt-normalized sum pooling, softmax-gated weighted averaging, and L2-normalized softmax-gated ag-gregation. We label these as Mean, Sqrt-sum, Softmax mean, and Softmax L2-sum in Fig. 10: 

ymean  

> g

= 1

m

X

> i∈E g

hi, (4) 

y√sum  

> g

= 1

√m

X

> i∈E g

hi, (5) 

yrmean  

> g

=

P 

> i∈E g

αihi

P 

> i∈E g

αi

, (6) 

yr√sum  

> g

=

P 

> i∈E g

αihi

qP 

> i∈E g

α2

> i

. (7) The sqrt-normalized variants are variance-preserving normalizations: if independent expert outputs have comparable scale, the aggregate scale stays roughly stable as the effective number of contribu-tors changes. The routed mean is the usual softmax-gated weighted average. In the implementation, denominators in the routed formulas are protected with a small ϵ for numerical stability. 

Routing coefficients. The coefficients are produced by a scaled dot-product router. For dense experts, the router context is the concatenation of the encoded observation or token representation and the current shared latent state, c = [ xenc ; s]. For convolutional recurrent experts, both tensors are first spatially average-pooled, then concatenated. The router maps this context to a query and compares it to learned expert keys: 

q = Wq c + bq , ki = Wkei + bk, ℓi = q⊤ki

√d , αi = softmax( ℓ)i. (8) Here ei is a learned embedding for expert i, d is the router embedding dimension, and ℓi are the router logits. 

Default choice. We use Sqrt-sum as the default aggregation rule used throughout the paper, except in experiments that explicitly ablate aggregation. It is parameter-free, keeps the aggregate scale stable as the number of contributing experts changes, and is consistently competitive across domains. For the FineWeb shared-global transformer, we use it for both expert outputs and the merged key-value proposals. 20 Preprint 

Figure 10: Aggregation ablations across domains. Left : Sokoban ConvLSTM with carried state with d = 128 , L = 1 , E = 4 ; bars show mean episodic return with one standard error across three seeds. Right : FineWeb next-token prediction, lower is better. 

E COMMUNICATION RADIUS 

We vary how many other experts each expert can read at each depth level in a Sokoban model with 

E = 8 ConvLSTM experts per layer, width d = 32 , and within-step depth L = 2 . Experts are arranged in a ring and read their own state plus those of a chosen number of preceding neighbours. The visible states are summed and divided by the square root of their count, keeping the input width and expert computation fixed. Fig. 11 shows that full communication achieves the highest mean return. These results indicate that sharing information across experts contributes to the model’s performance. We only use full communication for other experiments in the paper. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

> number of neighbours
> 5678910
> mean return

Figure 11: Communication between experts in Sokoban. Mean episodic return versus the number of neighbors. Mean returns with one standard error are reported across three seeds. 21 Preprint 

F SOKOBAN PLANNING ANALYSIS 

We follow the spatial probing method of Bush et al. (2025), who decoded iteratively refined plans in DRC agents. We apply their agent-move probes to our models’ final residual representations and compare how decoded plans develop across environment steps at different depth allocations. We extend Fig. 4 to four large-budget recurrent ConvLSTMs with fixed width d = 256 and (L, E ) ∈

(1 , 15) , (2 , 8) , (4 , 4) , (8 , 2) . For each allocation, we select the best of three training seeds by solve rate on 1,000 Unfiltered Test levels, using greedy actions with a 120-step limit. Following Bush et al. (2025) for each frozen policy, we train convolution 3 × 3 probes on 3,000 Unfiltered Train trajectories. Each probe reads the final residual representation at each step. At each level location, the target is the direction of the agent in this location in the recorded trajectory, or NEVER if agent does not visit it. We evaluate decoding on the 906 Test levels solved by all four policies. Recall is the fraction of non-N EVER targets correctly predicted above threshold, and precision is the fraction of emitted directions that are correct. We choose one fixed threshold per model to achieve approximately 93% precision for all prediction over first 20 steps. L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 0% 25% 50% 75% 100% 96.3% 98.6% 98.5% 96.8%         

> Solve rate
> 0510 15 19
> Environment step
> 75% 80% 85% 90% 95% 100%
> Agent move precision
> L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8
> 0510 15 19
> Environment step
> 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
> Agent move recall

Figure 12: Agent-move decoding comparison across models with different L.The L = 4 model initially has higher recall than the L = 2 model, indicating a more complete decoded plan. The L = 2 model catches up over the next few environment steps, after which both maintain similar recall. Together with their nearly identical solve rates, this pattern is consistent with the shallower model compensating for less planning within each update by continuing the computation across environment steps, catching up early enough to preserve task performance. A similar pattern appears for the L = 1 and L = 8 models, which also achieve similar test solve rates: 

L = 8 initially has higher recall, while L = 1 narrows the gap over subsequent steps, although it does not fully close it. 

Visualization. To make the analysis self-contained, we also include a visualization of how plans develop in the two layer model (Fig. 13). The main DRC model analyzed by Bush et al. (2025) combines within-step looping with temporal recurrence, and our models do not use within-step looping. 22 Preprint Step 0 Step 1 Step 2 

Figure 13: Agent move plans over the first three environment steps. The two layer model from Fig. 12 is shown on one Test level. 

G IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND HYPERPARAMETERS USED IN 

EXPERIMENTS 

This section reports the training hyperparameters used across the main experiments. Table 3: Hyperparameters used in reinforcement-learning experiments. 

Parameter Value Sokoban 

Encoder hidden dimension 32 Discount rate γ 0.97 Lambda for general advantage estimation 0.97 Entropy coefficient 0.01 Value function coefficient 1.0 Normalize advantages No Unroll length 20 Number of environments 32 Total environment steps 50,000,000 Learning rate 4 × 10 −4

Anneal learning rate Yes Optimizer Adam Adam epsilon 10 −6

Maximum gradient norm for clipping 1.0 23 Preprint Table 4: Hyperparameters used in next-token prediction experiments. 

Parameter Value FineWeb next-token prediction 

Vocabulary size 50,304 Attention heads 8 query, 4 key-value default; scaled with width proportionally Token batch size 131,072 Training steps 10,000 Optimizer Muon core; AdamW embed/readout Gate parameters Muon Optimizer betas (0.8, 0.95) Gradient clipping 1.0 Learning rate schedule Warmup-cosine decay Peak learning rate 2 × 10 −2

Minimum learning rate 2 × 10 −4

Warmup steps 100 Embedding learning rate 0.2( d/ 768) −1/2

Readout learning rate 0.004( d/ 768) −1/2

Weight decay 0Cautious weight decay 0.01 Numerical precision bfloat16 

Transformer 

Training sequence length 256 or 2048 

Recurrent Transformer 

Shared KV cache length 128 or 1024 Training sequence length 64 G.1 COMPUTE RESOURCES 

The reinforcement-learning experiments were run on NVIDIA RTX 8000 and L40S GPUs. Most Sokoban runs use one or two GPUs and take a few hours for small configurations, while the largest fixed-compute and within-step-depth-heavy configurations can take up to roughly one day. The FineWeb next-token prediction experiments were run on NVIDIA H100 GPUs. All FineWeb runs use four GPUs and take several hours for standard configurations, while the largest fixed-compute and within-step-depth-heavy configurations can take up to roughly one day. 

H LATENCY AND TRAINING THROUGHPUT 

These measurements are preliminary. Neither implementation was extensively optimized for in-ference, so the latency results should be interpreted with caution. Both implementations use JAX; Recurrent Transformer experts at the same depth level are evaluated with jax.vmap whenever they can execute in parallel. Measurements use four 80GB NVIDIA H100 GPUs, hidden dimension 768, eight query heads, four key-value heads, and budget L·E = 16 . For the Recurrent Transformer, L is within-step depth and E is the number of parallel experts per depth level. In latency measurements, 

B is the global inference batch. In training throughput measurements, B is the global batch size and 

C is the training sequence length, giving CB tokens per optimizer update. H.1 INFERENCE LATENCY 

Table 5 reports latency after pre-filling the KV caches of either model to length C.24 Preprint Table 5: Four-H100 median latency in milliseconds per token. 

Model C = 128 , B = 16 C = 2048 , B = 16 

Transformer L = 16 , E = 1 0.565 0.670 Recurrent L = 1 , E = 16 0.108 0.131 Recurrent L = 2 , E = 8 0.431 0.554 Recurrent L = 4 , E = 4 0.552 0.637 Recurrent L = 8 , E = 2 0.815 0.935 Recurrent L = 16 , E = 1 1.402 1.577 

H.2 TRAINING THROUGHPUT 

Table 6 measures the complete FineWeb training update, including the normal dataloader, forward and backward passes, and optimizer update. Table 6: Four-H100 FineWeb training throughput in tokens/s. Each panel has fixed number of tokens per optimizer update. C is the training sequence length and B is the global batch size. 

131k effective tokens per optimizer update Model 

C = 32 

B = 4 ,096 

C = 64 

B = 2 ,048 

C = 128 

B = 1 ,024 

C = 256 

B = 512 

C = 1024 

B = 128 

C = 2048 

B = 64 

Transformer L = 16 , E = 1 967.7k 1,027.4k 1,025.3k 1,054.3k 1,016.9k 968.1k Recurrent L = 1 , E = 16 505.4k 445.7k 349.5k 229.4k 51.1k OOM Recurrent L = 2 , E = 8 265.8k 209.5k 145.2k 85.8k OOM OOM Recurrent L = 4 , E = 4 189.7k 148.7k 99.1k OOM OOM OOM Recurrent L = 8 , E = 2 118.3k 88.4k OOM OOM OOM OOM 262k effective tokens per optimizer update Model 

C = 32 

B = 8 ,192 

C = 64 

B = 4 ,096 

C = 128 

B = 2 ,048 

C = 256 

B = 1 ,024 

C = 1024 

B = 256 

C = 2048 

B = 128 

Transformer L = 16 , E = 1 886.9k 1,031.5k 1,095.8k 1,132.0k 1,095.8k 1,071.5k Recurrent L = 1 , E = 16 556.2k 526.4k 447.7k 313.1k OOM OOM Recurrent L = 2 , E = 8 306.0k 264.6k 190.2k OOM OOM OOM Recurrent L = 4 , E = 4 199.9k 170.8k OOM OOM OOM OOM Recurrent L = 8 , E = 2 OOM OOM OOM OOM OOM OOM 

I FINE WEB FIXED -C OMPUTE SWEEPS 

Fig. 14 show FineWeb fixed-compute allocations at small budget with long context and Fig. 15 shows FineWeb fixed-compute allocations the medium budget, comparing Recurrent Transformer and Transformer architectures. 768 960 

hidden dim 

> 45816
> experts per layer

Recurrent Transformer 

> 3.54
> 3.44 3.41 3.43
> 768 960 1152 1344 1536 1728 2112

hidden dim 

> 123456816

Transformer        

> 3.95 3.55 3.46
> 3.42 3.40
> 3.54 3.95 3.54 3.96 3.55
> 3.46
> 3.95 3.57 4.02 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0
> validation loss
> L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 L=16 top 3

Figure 14: FineWeb small budget allocations with long context. Lower is better. 25 Preprint 768 960 1056 1152 1200 1440 1536 1920 2112 2496 3072 

hidden dim 

123457810 13 16 32 

> experts per layer

Recurrent Transformer 

3.58 3.48 

3.46 

3.51 3.59 3.67 3.46 

3.45 

3.60 3.55 3.46 3.48 3.58 

3.44 

3.52 3.55 3.46 3.46 3.57 3.48 3.62 

768 960 1056 1152 1200 1536 1920 2112 2496 3072 

hidden dim 

123457810 13 16 32 

Transformer 

3.93 3.61 3.54 3.52 3.50 

3.45 

3.60 3.51 

3.44 

3.91 3.58 3.46 

3.44 

3.49 3.91 3.59 3.50 3.94 3.61 3.99 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 

> validation loss

L=1 L=2 L=4 L=7 L=8 L=13 L=16 L=32 top 3 

Figure 15: FineWeb medium budget allocations. Lower is better. 

J SOKOBAN FIXED -C OMPUTE SWEEPS 

Fig. 2, Fig. 16 and Fig. 17 show the Sokoban the ConvLSTM allocations at the small, medium, and large budgets under recurrent and feedforward settings. The large-budget snapshot includes only completed training runs. 32 64 128 256 

hidden dim 

124816 32 

> experts per layer

Recurrent 

8.80 8.57 8.38 9.24 9.07 8.07 7.22 8.93 9.20 8.92 7.38 

9.56 9.78 9.68 

32 64 128 256 

hidden dim 

124816 32 

Feedforward 

-8.89 -8.83 0.20 5.57 -8.87 -0.36 5.04 -8.92 -0.30 4.75 7.32 

8.37 7.67 7.34 

−7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 

> Mean return

L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 L=16 top 3 

Figure 16: Sokoban medium budget allocations. 26 Preprint 64 128 256 512 1024 

hidden dim 

124816 32 64 128 256 

> experts per layer

Recurrent 

> 9.00 9.28 9.39 9.50 9.48 9.96 10.02
> 10.22
> 10.09 9.94
> 10.16
> 10.16
> 10.19
> 8.57 9.55 9.43 8.24 7.67 7.74

64 128 256 512 1024 

hidden dim 

124816 32 64 128 256 

Feedforward 

> -8.76 -8.76 -8.89 -8.80 -8.81 1.50 1.80 2.22 2.36 6.23 6.94 7.29 6.81 8.87
> 9.21
> 9.09
> 9.42 9.27
> 8.65

−7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 

> Mean return

L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 L=16 top 3 (N=3) 

Figure 17: Sokoban large budget allocations. Table 7: Sokoban ConvLSTM matched-compute budgets run summaries. Mean, sample vari-ance (denominator N − 1), and seed count N of the per-seed final-five episodic returns. 

Recurrent 

Budget L E d Mean Variance N

Small 1 1 128 7.750 0.0076 3Small 1 4 64 7.664 0.1200 3Small 1 12 32 5.670 1.0279 3Small 2 2 64 8.947 0.0685 3Small 2 6 32 7.336 0.0454 3Small 4 1 64 9.212 0.0005 3Small 4 3 32 7.952 0.4108 3Small 8 2 32 7.929 0.1292 3Small 16 1 32 6.297 0.0277 3Medium 1 1 256 8.795 0.0179 3Medium 1 4 128 8.566 0.1426 3Medium 1 14 64 8.382 0.1108 3Medium 1 45 32 7.224 0.3117 3Medium 2 2 128 9.558 0.0101 3Medium 2 7 64 9.241 0.0038 3Medium 2 23 32 8.928 0.0031 3Medium 4 1 128 9.778 0.0197 3Medium 4 3 64 9.677 0.0443 3Medium 4 11 32 9.200 0.0221 3Medium 8 2 64 9.067 0.9128 3Medium 8 6 32 8.919 0.1909 3Medium 16 1 64 8.068 0.0537 3Medium 16 3 32 7.378 0.1338 3Large 1 1 1024 9.479 0.0288 3Large 1 4 512 9.503 0.0033 3Large 1 15 256 9.394 0.0132 3Large 1 58 128 9.278 0.0469 3Large 1 208 64 9.001 0.0354 3Large 2 2 512 10.092 0.0085 3Large 2 8 256 10.219 0.0113 3Large 2 29 128 10.023 0.0074 3Large 2 104 64 9.963 0.0267 3Large 4 1 512 10.189 0.0077 3Large 4 4 256 10.163 0.0138 3Large 4 14 128 10.164 0.0074 3Large 4 52 64 9.944 0.0239 3Large 8 2 256 9.429 0.4706 3Large 8 7 128 9.551 0.1403 3Large 8 26 64 8.575 0.2624 3Large 16 1 256 7.735 0.1215 3Large 16 4 128 7.667 0.2837 3Large 16 13 64 8.241 0.7027 3

Feedforward 

Budget L E d Mean Variance N

Small 1 1 128 -9.080 0.0007 3Small 1 4 64 -8.940 0.0185 3Small 1 12 32 -9.174 0.0033 3Small 2 2 64 -2.050 0.2530 3Small 2 6 32 -2.255 0.2295 3Small 4 1 64 3.697 0.1589 3Small 4 3 32 2.938 0.0237 3Small 8 2 32 5.902 0.5632 3Small 16 1 32 5.491 0.0821 3Medium 1 1 256 -8.889 0.0042 3Medium 1 4 128 -8.829 0.0086 3Medium 1 14 64 -8.874 0.0006 3Medium 1 45 32 -8.917 0.0004 3Medium 2 2 128 0.204 0.1498 3Medium 2 7 64 -0.357 0.2066 3Medium 2 23 32 -0.297 0.1262 3Medium 4 1 128 5.571 0.1257 3Medium 4 3 64 5.039 0.1118 3Medium 4 11 32 4.753 0.0918 3Medium 8 2 64 8.367 0.0050 3Medium 8 6 32 7.324 0.0180 3Medium 16 1 64 7.674 0.1781 3Medium 16 3 32 7.336 0.0311 3Large 1 1 1024 -8.810 0.0143 3Large 1 4 512 -8.801 0.0122 3Large 1 15 256 -8.885 0.0265 3Large 1 58 128 -8.760 0.0083 3Large 1 208 64 -8.765 0.0041 3Large 2 2 512 2.356 0.0064 3Large 2 8 256 2.216 0.0352 3Large 2 29 128 1.797 0.0835 3Large 2 104 64 1.497 0.0736 3Large 4 1 512 6.807 0.0178 3Large 4 4 256 7.295 0.0715 3Large 4 14 128 6.938 0.0739 3Large 4 52 64 6.226 0.2677 3Large 8 2 256 9.090 0.0501 3Large 8 7 128 9.215 0.0544 3Large 8 26 64 8.875 0.1905 3Large 16 1 256 8.650 0.1802 3Large 16 4 128 9.271 0.0152 3Large 16 13 64 9.417 0.0358 3

K CONV GLU S OKOBAN 

Fig. 18 shows the similar saturation ans scaling effects but for the ConvGLU architecture in Sokoban. Fig. 19 and Fig. 20 show the recurrent and feedforward allocations for the ConvGLU sweeps. 27 Preprint −5 0510 

L = 1 L = 2 L = 4 L = 2 L = 4 L = 8 

Sokoban 

Recurrent Feedforward 

1 4 8 16 32 

experts per layer 

−9.5 −9.0 L = 1 

> mean return

1 2 4 8 16 

Within-step depth 

−5 0510 

> mean return

Sokoban 

small budget medium budget Recurrent Feedforward 

Figure 18: Sokoban ConvGLU scaling. Left: Mean return across different numbers of experts per layer at fixed within-step depths. Right: Within-step depth saturation at the small and medium budgets. Mean return with one standard error across three seeds is reported. 32 64 128 

hidden dim 

124816 36 

> experts per layer

Recurrent 

> 6.58 7.65 7.73 8.79 8.93 9.14 8.22 8.86
> 9.21 9.24 9.46

32 64 128 

hidden dim 

124818 36 72 

Feedforward 

> -8.92 -8.79 -8.88 -1.07 -0.30 -0.56 4.13 4.49 4.54 6.62
> 7.21 7.16 7.36

−7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 

> Mean return

L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 L=16 top 3 

Figure 19: Sokoban small-budget the ConvGLU allocations under recurrent and feedforward set-tings. 32 64 128 256 

hidden dim 

124816 32 64 128 

> experts per layer

Recurrent 

> 8.76 9.38 8.45 9.55 9.23 8.01 8.29 9.33 8.78 8.21 7.70 9.05 9.42 8.12 7.37
> 9.64 9.74 9.59

32 64 128 256 

hidden dim 

124816 32 64 128 

Feedforward 

> -8.86 0.88 5.29 -8.82 0.96 5.07 -8.90 0.35 5.30 6.80 -8.72 0.35 5.01 6.77 7.04
> 7.57 7.55 7.64

−7.5 −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 

> Mean return

L=1 L=2 L=4 L=8 L=16 top 3 

Figure 20: Sokoban medium-budget ConvGLU allocations under recurrent and feedforward settings. 28