Title: The Physics Network is Distinct from the Multiple Demand System in the Human Brain

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
The Physics Network is Distinct from the Multiple Demand System 

# in the Human Brain 

RT Pramod*, Sam Hutchinson* and Nancy Kanwisher 

Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT 

* indicates equal contribution 

Abstract: Recent studies implicate regions of the human bilateral fronto -parietal cortices in 

intuitive physical reasoning —our ability to perceive, predict, and plan in the physical world. 

However, it remains unclear whether this "Physics Network" (PN) constitutes a distinct and 

domain -specific system, or whether instead it overlaps with the nearby domain -general multiple 

demand (MD) network. To answer this question, we scanned participants (N = 20) with fMRI in a 

pre -registered study and measured spatial overlap , response profile differences , and resting -state 

correlation between the PN and MD networks. We find that : (1) The PN and MD networks overlap 

only minimally within individual participants , (2) Each network exhibits distinct functional 

profiles across a broad array of tasks , and (3) Time courses of functional response are more 

correlated between subregions within the same network than subregions between networks. These 

findings indicate that the Physics Network is dissociable from the Multiple Demand system both 

spatial ly and functionally , supporting its distinct role in intuitive physical reasoning. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Introduction 

Our ability to perceive, predict , and plan action s in the physical world hinges on a 

sophisticated understanding of the physical structure of the world and the properties and behavior 

of objects within it . Recent neuroimaging studies have identified a set of fronto -parietal cortic al 

regions —the ‘Physics Network’ (PN )—in the human brain that support this intuitive physical 

reasoning . The PN is activated preferentially for physical reasoning relative to difficulty -matched 

non -physical control task s (Fischer et al., 2016 ). Recent studies have also shown that PN carries 

abstract information about object mass (Schwettmann et al., 2019) , material properties (Paulun et 

al., 2025) , the stability of configuration s of objects (Pramod et al., 2022) , and the presence of 

object -to -object contact (Pramod et al., 2025) . Moreover , the PN represents predictions abou t

imminent physical events , such as colli sion between two objects (Pramod et al., 2025) .

Additionally, the PN is sensitive to violation s of physical but not social expectations (Liu et al., 

2024) , suggesting it implements domain -specific predictions . These findings collectively support 

the hypothesis that the PN contains a probabilistic generative model of the physical world like 

those used in video games , thus serving as "the brain's physics engine " (Battaglia et al., 2013) .

But is the PN truly a domain -specific system in the human brain , or does it merely represent 

a facet of a more general -purpose network ? One reason to suspect the PN may have a mo re general 

function is that its anatomical distribution in the parietal and frontal cortices (see Figure 1) 

resembles that of the famously general -purpose " Multiple Demand " (MD) network , which is 

defined by its domain -general response to a wide variety of cognitive "demand" (Assem et al., 

2020; Duncan, 2010; Duncan & Owen, 2000; Fedorenko et al., 2013) . If the Physics Network 

overlaps with the Multiple Demand Network, that would challenge our current understanding of 

both systems. The MD system would be shown to depend more on the content of information 

processed than previously thought, and the PN would be shown to be less functionally specific 

than previously thought. If instead the overlap between the two systems is minimal, that woul d

support current view s of the domain specificity of the PN and domain generality of the MD 

netw ork. 

This question has been examined in a recent paper (Kean et al., 2025) , wh ich investigated 

spatial and functional overlap between the PN and the MD , language (Fedorenko et al., 2024) , and 

theory -of -mind (Jacoby et al., 2016; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003) systems in the human brain. Th at 

study revealed that the PN is spatially and functionally dissociable from language and theory -of -

mind systems, but showed more complex relationships with MD. While the PN showed selective 

responses in the physics localizer contrast , some subregions of PN also responded strongly to the 

MD localizer contrast . A whole -brain Dice coefficient analysis revealed low -to -moderate overlap 

between PN and MD systems, suggesting only partial dissociation. However, th is whole -brain 

analysis included regions outside the ‘core’ fronto -parietal PN (regions defined in Fischer et al., 

2016 ), which may have biased the overlap estimates by including diffuse, weakly selective voxels. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To extend and refine these findings, we conducted a focused investigation of the core 

fronto -parietal PN and neighboring MD regions in individual participants. Our approach addresses 

three key limitations of prior work: 1) we focused specifically on the core fronto -parietal regions 

that have been most clearly implicated in intuitive physics, rather than measuring overlap across 

the whole brain, which includes regions activated by the standard physics localizer but whose role 

in intuitive physics is less clear; (2) we examined the function of both the PN and MD regions in 

detail, quantifying th e response of each to 13 different stimulus and task conditions beyond the 

standard localizers; and (3) we computed resting -state functional correlations within and across 

networks to characterize their organization at the network level. This multi -level analysis —

combining spatial segregation, functional selectivity, and network connectivity —provides a 

comprehensive test of whether PN and MD are truly dissociable systems. 

First, w e scanned 20 participant s in order to localize each system. To identify the PN, we 

used the now -standard "Towers" localizer ( Fischer et al., 2016 ; Figure 1 ), in which participants 

view video s of rotating tower of blocks, and judge either whether more blocks will land on the red 

or green side of the floor when the tower topples (the physics task), or whether the tower contains 

more blue or yellow blocks (the difficulty -matched non -physics control task). To identify the MD 

Figure 1: Group level random effects (rfx) analyses of the Physics Network (PN) and the 

Multiple Demand (MD) network. The rfx results are thresholded at p < 0. 005 (uncorrected) 

and are displayed on the inflated surface of the left hemisphere of the human brain in the 

fsaverage space . The Physics Network was identified in each participant by the contrast between 

a physical and a color judgement task (top left). The Multiple Demand network was identified 

using the hard > easy contrast in a spatial working memory task (top right). Note t hat all the 

analyses presented in this study were performed in the volume space and surface maps are used 

for visualization only. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Network, we used a standard spatial working memory task ( Fedorenko et al., 2013 ; Figure 1 ) in 

which participants view a sequence of two 4x4 grids, each containing either two (the difficult 

condition) or one (easy condition) filled -in cell s, and then cho ose which of two sample grids 

contains all and only the filled -in cells from the sequence . The MD system is defined as the set of 

voxels that respond more strongly in the hard than easy version of this spatial working memory 

task. Critically, b y running these two localizers in each participant we can ask whether the PN and 

MD networks overlap at the individual -participant level. This analysis is important to avoid 

potentially spurious overlap from group analyses that blur activations because of variability across 

participants in the precise anatomical location of each functionally defined region. 

# Results 

Physics Network and Multiple Demand Network largely spatially segregate in individual brains 

The apparent spatial overlap between the PN and MD group -level maps (see Figure 1) 

suggests a potential overlap between these two networks at the level of individual participants .

However, anatomical variability of functional regions across participants can lead to spurious 

overlap in group analyses that is not reflected in individual participants. To test whether this is the 

case for the PN and MD network , we computed activation maps for the PN and MD localizer 

within each participant individually (see example individual -level maps in Figure 2A and for all 

participants in Figure S 2) and then calculated the Dice -Sorensen coefficient for PN - and MD -

selective regions in each participant . This metric quantifies the spatial overlap between two regions 

(ranging from 0 for no overlap to 1 for perfect overlap) while accounting for differences in their 

overall size (see Methods for details) .

We found that the average Dice -Sorensen coefficient for overlap between PN and MD was 

0.077 ( standard error of the mean [ s.e.m. ] = 0.016 across participants ), indicating very little overlap 

between these two networks at the individual level . In sharp contrast, within -network overlap —

calculated by comparing independent splits of the localizer data —was substantially higher, with 

average coefficients (mean ± s.e.m. across participants) of 0.37 ± 0.05 for PN and 0.33 ± 0.043 for 

MD (Figure 2B). This difference was also significant as assessed in a repeated measure, mixed 

effect ANVOA with participants as a random factor and overlap type (within -PN, within -MD, and 

between -network) as a fixed factor (p < 0.00005 for the main effect of overlap type). Post -hoc 

analysis (using multcompare function in MATLAB) confirmed that both the within -network 

overlaps were significantly higher than the between -network overlap . Importantly , both within -

and between -network overlaps were significantly greater than expected by chance (p < 0.0001; 

10,000 bootstrap samples randomly assigning voxels within the combined parcel to either PN or 

MD, see Methods ). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To examine whether spatial dissociation between the PN and MD networks differed across 

brain regions , we computed the Dice -Sorensen coefficient separately for parietal and frontal lobes .

We found that the between -network overlap was lower than within -network overlap in both 

parietal and frontal lobes (only significant main effect of overlap type, p < 0.00005, in an ANOVA 

with overlap type and lobes as factors; Figure S 3), indicating that the two networks are largely 

dissociable even within individual brain lobes. Thus, the spatial segregation between PN and MD 

is not limited to specific sub -regions but reflects a general organizational principle .

Figure 2: Dissociation between PN and MD networks in individual participants. A) Cortical 

surface projections showing PN - (in red) and MD -selective (in blue) vertices in the fronto -

parietal cortices of 4 example participants. The vertices selective for both PN and MD are shown 

in green. The top and bottom rows show left and right hemispheres respectively. B) Dice -

Sorensen coefficient computed over only significant voxels (p < 0.001) within -PN (i.e., across 

the two separate activation maps, each calculated based on half the PN localizer data), within -

MD, and between PN and MD systems averaged across all participants. The error bars denote 

standard error of mean of the Dice -Sorensen co efficients across participants. C) Average Dice -

Sorensen coefficient plotted as a function of significance threshold (p -value, in log scale) used 

to select voxels from each localizer contrast, showing the overlap between compared to within 

networks for all p-level thresholds. The error bars show standard error of mean across 

participants. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The spatial overlap results were also robust across different voxel selection criteri a. The 

Dice -Sorensen coefficient for PN -MD overlap remained lower than within -network overlap s

regardless of the statistical significance threshold (p -value) used to select voxels from the localizer 

contrasts (Figure 2C). Select ing the top 10% most selective voxels within each network produced 

similar results, with between -network overlap remain ing low , and low er than within -network 

overlaps. 

We further tested whether the spatial dissociation was specific to the spatial working 

memory task used to define MD. Using an alternative Math vs. Non -math contrast to localize MD 

(see Methods), we again observed stronger within -MD overlap (0.43 ± 0. 03 4) than between -

network overlap (0. 07 3 ± 0. 01 3; p < 0.00005 for the main effect of overlap type in a repeated 

measure, mixed -effect ANOVA with participants as a random factor and overlap type as a fixed 

factor; Figure S4), mirroring the results from the standard spatial working memory localizer. This 

consistency across different MD definitions strengthens the conclusion that spatial segregation 

between PN and MD is a robust feature of individual brain organization. 

Together, t hese results establish that despite apparent overlap in group -level maps, the PN 

and MD networks are largely spatially segregated in individual brains. 

Physics Network and Multiple Demand Network show distinct selectivities 

In the previous section, we provided evidence for the spatial dissociation between PN and 

MD regions . But two functionally defined regions can be spatially nonoverlapping even if they are 

functionally very similar, if one region is just over threshold for significance on one localizer 

contrast but just under significance for the other localizer contrast , and the other region shows the 

opposite pattern. Put another way, the spatial nonoverlap of two functionally defined regions is “a 

difference in significances, not a significant difference”. To statistically test whether the PN and 

MD regions in fact differ significantly from each other in function , and to more broadly 

characterize the functional selectivity of each, we first measured the response in each functionally 

defined region for the four conditions from the localizers in held -out data . Next, we did the same 

for 13 other stimulus and task conditions (see Methods) . This analysis excludes the small set of 

overlapping voxels (which we examine separately below), allowing us to assess the functional 

profiles of each system in its core, selective regions. 

First, when analyzing responses of each system to the four localizer conditions, w e found 

a significant three -way interaction (p = 0.0001) in an ANOVA with functional regions (PN/MD), 

localizer task (Towers/Spatial Working Memory), and condition (test/control) as factors. Thus, the 

PN and MD regions indeed differed significantly from each other in their response to the four 

localizer c onditions. Next, we analyzed each network individually. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In the PN (Figure 3A) , as expected we found a significant ly higher response to the Physics 

than Color condition in held -out data from the PN localizer (p < 0.0005 on a two -sided Wilcoxon 

signed rank test) . We also found a significant ly higher response to the Hard than Easy condition in 

the MD localizer (p < 0.0005 on a two -sided Wilcoxon signed rank test) . However, the PN localizer 

contrast was significantly stronger than the MD localizer contrast (p = 0.039 for the interaction 

effect in an ANOVA on fMRI beta activations with localizer type [towers /spatial working memory ]

Figure 3: Functional dissociation between PN and MD networks. Average fMRI response 

magnitudes (betas) for all conditions in held -out data from the two localizer tasks and 13 other 

tasks in A) PN -selective voxels, and B) MD -selective voxels. The error bars denote standard 

error of mean of fMRI activations across part icipants. * is p < 0.05, ** is p < 0.005, and *** is 

p < 0.0005. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and condition [test /control ] as factors) . Thus, the PN -selective voxels respond to both task 

contrasts, but more strongly to the physics localizer contrast than to the spatial working memory 

task contrast. 

In the MD -selective region (Figure 3B) , we again found significant effect s of both the PN 

and MD localizer contrasts (Hard > Easy activations across participant : p < 0.0005; Physics >

Color activations across participants : p = 0.0051 on a two -sided Wilcoxon signed rank test) .

However, the pattern was reversed: an ANOVA on fMRI beta activations revealed a significant 

interaction effect (p = 0 .008) , with the MD localizer contrast significantly stronger than the PN 

localizer contrast. This finding demonstrates functional selectivity in the opposite direction —MD -

selective voxels show a stronger contrast for the spatial working memory task than for the physics 

localizer task. 

To test whether this functional dissociation depends on the specific spatial working 

memory task we used as our MD localizer , we repeated the analysis with an alternative contrast to 

localize MD : Math vs. Non -math (Marvi , Hutchinson et al., 2025) . In the Math condition, 

participants solved arithmetic problems presented auditorily. In the Non -math condition, 

participants heard false -belief and false -photograph stories (from a Theory of Mind localizer) and 

judged whether statements about the stories w ere true or false. The three -way interaction remained 

significant ( p < 0.005 , Figure S 5), with PN -selective regions still showing a stronger effect for 

physics contrast and MD -selective regions showing a stronger effect for the math contrast .

The small set of voxels showing significant activation for both towers and spatial working 

memory localizers displayed a different pattern. These overlapping voxels showed no significant 

interaction between localizer and condition in an ANOVA (p = 0.79 for Towers/ Spatial working 

memory overlap ; p = 0.06 for Towers/Math overlap; Figure S 6). This lack of selectivity suggests 

these voxels either contain intermixed populations of PN - and MD -selective neurons —below the 

resolution of fMRI to distinguish —or genuinely mixed -selectivity neurons that respond to both 

physics and cognitive demand. 

Having demonstrate d the functional dissociation between MD and PN systems, we then set 

out to charac terize the functional response profile of each system in more detail, by leverag ing 

data from a prior study ( Marvi , Hutchinson, et al., 2025 ; see Methods for details) that collected 

BOLD responses across four functional localizer paradigms , comprising 13 different conditions 

(videos of faces, objects scenes, bodies, and words from the dynamic ventral pathway localizer ;

images of Faces, Objects, Scenes, and Scrambled Objects ; written sentences and non -word stimuli ;

and written stories of characters experiencing either physical or emotional pain ). We computed the 

response of each system to each of these 13 conditions (see Figure 3 A-B) and found a significant 

interaction of region (MD /PN ) by condition in an ANOVA (p < 0. 0005) . Further ANOVAs run 

separately on the data from each of the four localizers found a significant interaction effect between 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

region and condition ( p < 0.0005 for video -based localizer, p < 0.0005 for image -based localizer, 

p < 0.05 for the language localizer, and p < 0.005 for the pain matrix localizer ). These analyses 

demonstrate clear functional differences in the response profile of the PN and MD systems , most 

strikingly a much stronger response to dynamic than static visual stimuli in the PN but not MD 

and a significantly higher response to stories describing physical than emotional pain in the PN 

but marginally so in the MD network (p < 0.0005 in the PN and p = 0.03 in the MD network on a 

two -sided Wilcoxon signed rank test comparing responses to physical and emotional pain 

conditions) . The latter shows that the PN also responds to verbal stimuli while maintaining its 

selectivity for physical content (physical > emotional pain). We are delving further into this 

important finding of modality -general responses in the PN in ongoing work. 

Taken together , the se analyses show that the PN and MD systems are not only spatially 

dissociable, but also exhibit strikingly different response profiles. 

Figure 4: Network -level dissociation between PN and MD systems. Resting state correlations 

within PN (in red), within MD (in blue), and between PN and MD (in green) averaged over sub -

regions and participants only across hemispheres (A), and both within and across hemispheres 

(B). The error bars denote standard error of mean across participants. * is p < 0.05. The statistical 

tests are performed on Fischer z -transformed correlations, but the plots show untransformed 

correlation values. 

Physics Network and Multiple Demand Network form dissociable resting state networks 

So far, our results show that PN and MD networks are both spatially and functionally 

separable in individual brains . But do they form distinct brain networks as well? Although PN has 

been referred to as ‘network’ in prior literature , direct evidence for strong functional correlation 

between sub -regions of PN is lacking (although see Navarro -Cebrián & Fischer, 2022 for 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

correlated activity between Anterior Cingulate Cortex and the PN) . We therefore use d resting -state 

functional correlations (Figure 4A; see Methods for details) to address this question .

To unconfound cortical proximity from inferred connectivity, we computed within - and 

between -network functional correlations only across hemispheres ( i.e., excluding ipsilateral 

correlations ). We found that subregions within the PN network were correlated with each other 

during resting state (average functional correlation between subregions across left and right 

hemispheres: r = 0.52; Figure 4A). Similarly, subregions of the MD network in the f ronto -parietal 

cortices were correlated with each other (average functional correlation between sub -regions 

across participants: r = 0.52). The correlations between subregions of PN were not statistically 

different from those with in the MD network (p = 0. 67 on a paired t -test), indicating that both 

networks exhibit similarly strong internal correlations. Critically, the functional correlation 

between subregions of different networks (i.e., PN and MD) was significantly weaker than 

correlations between subregi ons of the same network (average functional correlation between PN 

and MD subregions across hemispheres: r = 0.37; p < 0.0005 and p < 0.0005 for a paired t -test 

comparing against within -PN and within -MD correlations, respectively). 

The trends in functional correlations remained consistent even when we included the 

ipsilateral comparisons: subregions within each network were strongly correlated with each other 

(average functional correlation: r = 0.52 and 0.53 for PN and MD respectively ; Figure 4B ) and this 

within -network correlation was significantly stronger than between -network correlations (average 

r = 0. 42 between PN and MD sub -regions ; p < 0.005 and p < 0.0005 for a paired t -test comparing 

against within -PN and within -MD correlations, respectively ).

These findings provide the first evidence that PN constitutes a distinct cortical network 

with strong functional correlations between its subregions. More broadly, our results demonstrate 

that PN and MD form two separate cortical networks with distinct spatial and functional properties. 

Despite occupying similar anatomical territory, these networks maintain separate internal 

organization and distinct relationships with cognitive demands. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Discussion 

Despite observing substantial overlaps between group -level maps of the Physics Network 

(PN) and the Multiple Demand (MD) network in the human fronto -parietal cortices, we 

demonstrate in this study that these two networks are fundamentally distinct across three 

independent levels of analysis: i) they are largely spatially segregated at the individual level, ii) 

they show distinct functiona l selectivi ty profiles , and iii) they show greater resting functional 

correlation within each network than between networks. 

At the individual -subject level , we found minimal spatial overlap between the PN and MD 

networks (Dice -Sorenson coefficient = 0.0 8), indicating substantial spatial dissociation despite the 

apparent overlap at the group level . This spatial segregation remained robust across different 

statistical thresholds and even within individual cortical lobes (see Supplementary figures S1 -3). 

Using independent data to localize and measure network responses , we identified highly distinct 

functional selectivity profiles for the two networks ( Figure 3) across a diverse set of 13 stimulus 

and task conditions . Most notably, this analysis showed a much higher response to dyna mic than 

static visual stimuli in the PN but not MD network, and a highly selective response to stories 

describing physical versus emotional pain in the PN but less so in the MD network . This spatial 

and functional dissociation between PN and MD remained evident even when using alternative 

localizer tasks (e.g., Math task; Figures S4 and S5). Finally, r esting -state fMRI revealed strong er 

functional correlations within each network than between them , indicating that the PN and MD 

participate in partly distinct networks (Figure 4). Our findings complement and extend prior work 

demonstrating partial spatial dissociation between PN and MD systems (Fischer et al., 2016; Kean 

et al., 2025) , provid ing converging evidence from spatial, functional, and network correlation 

analyses that PN and MD are largely dissociable networks rather than overlapping subcomponents 

of a broader system. However, this functional segregation does not preclude interaction between 

networks: PN may communicate with the language network during tasks requiring linguistic 

description of physical events (the exportation hypothesis; (Casto et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026) ). 

While our resting -state connectivity results demonstrate that PN and MD form dissociable 

functional networks, they do not address whether PN shares its cognitive load with other fronto -

parietal networks. Our approach employed a functionally informed strategy: we first identified 

systems based on their responses to specific cognitive tasks, then examined their resting -state 

correlations . This approach has important advantages. By focusing on regions with specific 

functional selectivity, we can directly test whether systems that are functionally distinct are also 

distinct at the level of resting state networks . We also avoid the substantive interpretive challenge 

of reverse -engineering function from resting -state clustering. However, this functionally informed 

approach is necessarily constrained to networks with clear, measurable task responses . A

complementary exploratory approach —applying resting -state clustering methods without prior 

functional information —could discover novel network organizations, reveal cross -network 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

interactions that emerge only during rest, or identify networks specialized for functions not yet 

operationalized in laboratory tasks. We did not have enough resting state data to define these 

networks in individual participants reliably and hence we leave this comparison to future studies. 

Thus, a n important open question is how PN relates to the broader landscape of fronto -

parietal networks. Prior work has characterized numerous resting -state functional networks in the 

fronto -parietal cortex like the Default Mode Network (Buckner & DiNicola, 2019; Du et al., 2024) ,

the Dorsal Attention Network (Szczepanski et al., 2013) , and the Fronto -parietal Network 

(Corbetta et al., 2008; Fox et al., 2005) , involved in various cognitive processes including, 

attention, memory , planning , and mentalizing . Additionally, more functionally selective networks 

have been identified in nearby regions of fronto -parietal cortex , including the Action Observation 

Network (Caspers et al., 2010; Gazzola & Keysers, 2009; Goodale & Westwood, 2004) , as well as 

networks supporting tool processing (Gallivan et al., 2013; Mruczek et al., 2013; Valyear et al., 

2007) and numerical cognition (Harvey et al., 2013, 2015) . An important open question is how PN 

relates to these other networks, particularly at the individual -subject level. Some theories propose 

that action and tool processing are computationally linked to physical reasoning, with PN forming 

an integral part of the brain's embodied physics engine (Fischer & Mahon, 2021) . Future studies 

employing complementary approaches —both fROI -based characterizations of action and tool 

usage and resting -state network approaches —could comprehensively map how physical reasoning 

integrates with other specialized and domain -general systems to support flexible goal -directed 

behavior in the physical world. 

Our findings should be interpreted within the constraints of the neuroimaging and analyses 

methods used . Functional MRI has limited spatial resolution, preventing inferences about mixed 

selectivity at the level of single neurons (Rigotti et al., 2013) . The small but significant spatial 

overlap observed between PN and MD could reflect two possibilities that fMRI cannot distinguish: 

either spatially intermixed populations of PN -selective and MD -selective neurons, or genuine 

populations of neurons that re spond to both PN and MD task contrasts. Distinguishing between 

these alternatives would require higher -resolution imaging methods or complementary approaches 

such as electrophysiology. 

Our results are robust to the specific task used to define the MD network. When we used 

a math task instead of the spatial working memory task to localize the MD network, we observed 

similar patterns of spatial segregation and even stronger functional dissociation between PN and 

MD (Figures S 4 and S 5). This consistency across task definitions suggests the dissociation is a 

robust feature of these networks rather than an artifact of our localizer choice. Nevertheless, future 

studies examining network dissociation using additional task manipulations coul d strengthen this 

conclusion. Experiments that directly contrast task difficulty with physical reasoning will be able 

to provide a more nuanced picture of spatial and functional dissociations between PN and MD 

within the fronto -parietal cort ex. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Much remains to be learned about the neural basis of physical reasoning and its relationship 

to other neural systems. While we focus ed on the core fronto -parietal PN regions, additional 

regions beyond this core system also show selective responses to some physical reasoning tasks, 

including regions of the cerebel lum (unpublished observations) and at least one region in the 

anterior frontal lobe (Kean et al., 2025) . Another important question is how regions within the PN 

interact with other systems such as the language system (Casto et al., 2025) and systems for social 

cognition (Liu et al., 2026) . Comprehensively mapping the brain systems supporting physical 

reasoning and understanding how these domain -specific systems interact with other neural system s

remain an important challenge for future work. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Methods 

The methods and analysis plan were pre -registered and can be found here: https://osf.io/6vg2a/ 

Participants 

Participants were recruited from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the 

surrounding Boston area (n=20, 10 females ; age d 18 -50 ). Before starting the experiment, all 

participants were given informed consent of the protocol approved by the Allen Institute for Brain 

Science and were subsequently compensated $75 for their involvement per two -hour scan session. 

The data presented in t his paper were collected as part of a recent two -session study testing a new 

multi -function functional localizer (Marvi , Hutchinson et al., 202 5). 

Stimuli and experimental design 

Physics fROI Localizer (Towers task) 

Each participant performed two runs of an ‘intuitive physics’ fMRI localizer task 

previously used to functionally define the frontoparietal physics engine in the brain (Fischer et al., 

2016) . In this task, subjects viewed short movies (~6 s) depicting unstable towers made of blue, 

yellow and white blocks (see Figure 1) created using Blender 2.70 (Blender Foundation). The 

tower was centered on a floor that was colored green on one half and red on the other half such 

that it would topple toward one of the halves if gravity were to take effect. Throughout the movie, 

the tower remained stationary while the camera panned 360° to reveal different views of the tower. 

Subjects viewed these movies and were instructed to report whether more blocks would come to 

rest on the red or green half of the floor (‘physics’ task), or whether there are more blue or yellow 

blocks in the tower (‘color’ task). 

Each run of this localizer task consisted of 23 18 s blocks: 3 fixation -only blocks, 10 blocks 

each of the physics and the color task. Each 6 s movie was preceded by a text instruction displayed 

on the screen for 1 s which read either ‘where will it fall?’ (‘physics’ task) or ‘more blue or yellow?’ 

(‘color’ task) and was followed by a 2 -s response period with a blank screen. This sequence was 

repeated twice within a block with the same task cue but different movies. The subjects responded 

by pressing one of two buttons on a response box for each alternative in a task. The mapping of 

the buttons to the response was switched for the second run to rule out the effects of specific motor 

responses on the observed neural activations. We used a physics task > color task contrast to 

functionally identify the frontoparietal physics regions in each subject individually. 

MD fROI Localizer (Spatial Working Memory) 

Each participant also completed two runs of a spatial working memory fMRI localizer task 

previously used to define the frontoparietal ‘multiple demand’ (MD) regions (Fedorenko et al., 

2013) . On each trial, subjects see a series of 4x4 grids and keep track of either four or eight 

locations (‘easy’ and ‘hard’ trials, respectively) which have been marked on these grids either one 

or two at a time (see Figure 1) . At the end of each trial, subjects select which of two grids is 

showing the cumulative locations indicated on the previous grids in a two -alternative forced -

choice decision. 

Each run consisted of 48 eight -second trial blocks and four 16 -second fixation blocks, with 

a palindromic ordering of hard and easy trials counterbalanced across runs. We used a hard > easy 

contrast to functionally identify MD regions in each subject indiv idually. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Efficient Localizer 

In addition to the two localizers described above, each participant completed five runs of 

an efficient, multifunction localizer (EMFL; see Marvi , Hutchinson et al., 2025 for more details). 

The EMFL consists of five runs of ten 22 -second stimulus blocks and three 18 -second fixation 

blocks. Each stimulus block consists of a simultaneous presentation of stimuli from one visual 

category and one audio category. The visual stim uli are sets of short video clips showing dynamic 

examples from each of the following five categories: 1) faces, 2) scenes, 3) bodies, 4) objects, and 

5) letters (superimposed over a scrambled -object backgrounds). The audio stimuli encompass the 

following five categories: 1) false belief stories and 2) false photo stories (presented in English), 

3) arithmetic problems (also presented in English), 40 non -word sequences which were 

recognizably human speech , and 5) scrambled versions of the non -word sequences (‘quilted’ 

following the procedure of Overath et al., 2015) . Each of these audio stimuli were broken into two 

segments: first, a prologue which sets up a scenario description (for the stories), lists a set of 

arithmetic operations (for the math), or establishes the gender of the speaker (for the non -word and 

quilted stimuli), and second, a conclusion which states a fact about the scenario (for the stories), 

gives an answer to the operations (for the math), or again makes the gender of the speaker obvious 

(for the non -word and quilted stimuli). Participants were instructed to answer a “matching” task 

by pressing one of two buttons in the scanner: a positive match occurs when the stated fact is 

logically consistent with the story (for the story conditions), the proposed answer to the arithmetic 

operations is true (for the math), or the gender of the spea ker is the same for the two segments (for 

the non -word and quilted stimuli). There was no task related to the visual stimuli. 

The stimuli were paired such that each of the 25 possible combinations occurs twice across 

the five runs, and each category appears twice and in a palindromic (for visual categories) or semi -

palindromic (for the audio categories) order within each run. Thi s allows us to disentangle 

responses from each modality separately and compute contrasts on the relevant conditions within 

each modality. We also collected data on a number of standard localizers designed to measure each 

of these contrasts separately (see Marvi et al., 2025 for details). This yields another 10 condition 

estimates from separate localizers. The condition profiles within PN and MD described in the 

results section above are vectors containing estimates of the responses to all 20 of the conditions 

described here (10 from the EMFL, 10 from the standard localizers) .

To compare functional selectivity profiles between PN - and MD -selective regions, we 

chose only visual/ written conditions (excluding auditory/speech conditions) across the localizers 

for a total of 13 conditions: 5 visual conditions from the efficient localizer, 4 visual conditions 

from the FOSS localizer (images of Faces, Objects, Scenes, Scrambled Objects), 2 co nditions from 

the language localizer ( written sentences and non -word stimuli), 2 conditions from the pain matrix 

localizer ( written stories of characters experiencing physical or emotional pain ). 

Data acquisition and preprocessing 

All imaging was performed on a Siemens 3T MAGNETOM Tim Trio scanner with a 32 -

channel head coil at the Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center at MIT. For each subject, a high -

resolution T1 -weighted anatomical image (MPRAGE: TR = 2.53 s; TE = 3.57 ms ; α = 9°; FOV = 

256 mm; matrix = 256 × 256; slice thickness = 1 mm; 176 slices; acceleration factor = 3; 24 

reference lines) was collected in addition to whole -brain functional data using a T2 -weighted echo 

planar imaging pulse sequence. For 12 of the 20 s ubjects, the functional sequence had the 

following parameters: TR = 2 s; TE = 30 ms; α = 90°; FOV = 208 mm; matrix = 104 × 104; slice 

thickness = 2 mm; voxel size = 2 × 2 mm in -plane; slice gap = 0 mm; 52 slices. For the remaining 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

eight subjects, to include better coverage of the cerebellum, we used a similar functional sequence 

with these parameters: TR = 2 s; TE = 30 ms; α = 90°; FOV = 208 mm; matrix = 104 × 104; slice 

thickness = 2 mm; voxel size = 2 × 2 mm in -plane; slice gap = 0 mm; 72 slices .

Preprocessing was done using FreeSurfer (https://freesurfer.net/). All other analyses were 

performed in MATLAB 2015B (The Mathworks ). fMRI data preprocessing included motion 

correction, slice time correction, linear fit to detrend the time series, and spatial smoothing with a 

Gaussian kernel (FWHM = 3 mm). Before smoothing the functional data, all functional runs were 

coregistered to the subject’s T1 -weighted anatomical image. All analyses were performed in each 

subject’s native volume. The general linear model included the experimental conditions and 6 

nuisance regressors based on the motion estimates (x, y, and z translation; rol l, pitch, and yaw of 

rotation). 

Definition of individual fROIs 

General Method: Functional regions of interest (fROIs) were defined using a group -constrained 

subject specific method ( GSS; (Fedorenko et al., 2010; Julian et al., 2012) ). Specifically, we used 

pre -defined parcels obtained from group -level probabilistic maps in prior publications to constrain 

the set of voxels for a given subject. We transformed parcels into the subject’s native space, and 

then selected voxels falling wit hin these parcels based on their contrast significance in half of the 

localizer runs. Specifically, we selected voxels that showed significant contrast at p < 0.001 and if 

there were fewer than 50 voxels with this threshold, we reduced the threshold to p < 0.05. 

Subsequent analyses were performed in the se selected voxels using functional data from remaining 

held -out runs. We also performed the spatial overlap analyses by choosing top -10% voxels within 

the parcel based on the contrast t -values. 

PN parcels: The GSS method was used to create the PN parcels in the physics localizer task. 

Specifically, we used the functional localizer contrast (physics > color task) data from 42 

participants, all normalized to the fsaverage space, to create a probabilistic overlap map across 

individual subjects and across the whole brain. We then used watershed algorithm 

(‘spm_ss_watershed ’) to obtain contiguous regions (or parcels) of voxels displaying physics > 

color contrast in at least 60% of the subjects. We then combined regions within the frontal and 

parietal lobes separately (based on Fischer et al., 2016 ) to create PN network parcels. 

MD parcels: Parcels for the MD fROIs (available at https://www.evlab.mit.edu/resources) were 

also constructed as a probabilistic overlap map of a large number of individual subjects’ (who also 

completed the spatial working memory localizer task) hard > easy contrast maps using the GSS 

method .

For all our analyses in this study, we combined PN and MD parcels within parietal or frontal lobes 

to obtain anatomical regions -of -interest (i.e., union of blue , red , and green voxels in Figure S1) .

Note that all analyses in this study were performed in the volume space and the surface -based 

representations are only used for visualization. 

Statistical analyses 

Dice coefficient calculation 

Once we defined our fROIs as described above, we computed the Dice -Sorensen coefficient as, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Dice -Sorensen coefficient =  2|𝑆 𝑃𝑁  

> 𝑆 𝑀𝐷 |
> |𝑆 𝑃𝑁 |+|𝑆 𝑀𝐷 |

Where S PN and S MD are sets of voxels responding only to the physics localizer contrast and spatial 

working memory localizer contrast respectively, |.| operation denotes the cardinali ty (or, number 

of elements) in a set. We used the Dice -Sorensen coefficient to quantify the extent to which PN -

and MD - selective regions overlap spatially in individual brain s. Specifically, we computed the 

between -network overlaps using split -halves of the data: PN_even vs. MD_odd, and PN_odd vs. 

MD_even. We then averaged the two values to get an aggregate measure of the overlap. For within 

network overlaps, we computed the Dice -Sorensen coefficient for even and odd splits of the 

corresponding localizer task. 

Note that we computed the Dice -Sorensen coefficient across the combined fronto -parietal PN and 

MD parcels. We show results for overlap within frontal and parietal parcels separately in 

supplementary materials (Figure S3 ). 

Bootstrap analysis : To ascertain how the observed overlaps compare to random chance, we 

computed bootstrap estimated overlaps from random sampling of voxels. Specifically, within the 

combined parcel, we uniformly randomly chose voxels and assigned them to either one network 

(or within -network split) or the other. We ensured that the number of voxels chosen this way 

matched the number of significant voxels observed in the original analysis. We then computed the 

Dice -Sorensen coefficient between the two sets of randomly chosen voxels. We repeated this 

analysis 10,000 times to get a null distribution of chance overlaps. 

fROI selectivity 

We can further specify selective fROIs by defining the set of voxels that show a significant PN 

contrast but not a significant MD contrast ( PN -selective ), those which show the opposite pattern 

(MD -selective ), and those which respond to both the PN and MD contrast. The crucial question of 

this investigation now becomes: do PN -selective voxels, identified using one split of the PN 

localizer (intersected with the combined PN and MD group level parcels ), maintain their selectivity 

for physics>color and non -selectivity in the MD task (hard>easy) in independent data? Similarly, 

do MD -selective voxels ( intersected with the combined PN and MD group level parcels ) maintain 

their specificity for MD task and non -specificity for PN localizer in independent data? To assess 

this, we used the even (or odd) runs of each localizer experiment to select voxels that show a 

significant contrast response and then measured the responses of those same voxels in the odd (or 

even) runs of the experiment, within individual subjects. This allows us to obtain a set of eight 

measurements for each subject: the response to the physics, color, hard, and easy task conditions 

in PN - and MD -selective voxels. We can then submit these measures to a 3x2 ANOVA, where the 

factors are voxel set ( PN - vs MD -selective ), localizer ( Physics localizer vs Spatial working 

memory localizer), and task condition ( test condition [physics or hard] vs. control condition [color 

or easy]). We expected a significant triple -interaction effect between these factors indicating that 

voxels that only respond to the physics contrast but not the MD contrast, and vice -versa, in one 

split of th e data cross -validate this selectivity in independent data. 

To further investigate functional selectivity within PN - and MD -selective voxels, we compared 

activations in these sets of voxels in individual subjects to a set of independent task conditions 

(data from the efficient localizer in Marvi et al., 2025 ). These included a total of 20 conditions: 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Dynamic Visual Faces, Scenes, Bodies, Objects and Words (static words against dynamic 

scrambled background); Static Visual Faces, Scenes, Objects and Scrambled Objects; Auditory 

False Belief, False Photo, Non -words, Quilted Speech and Math; Visual Sentences and Non -words 

from a language localizer; Auditor y Non -words and Quilted speech from a speech localizer; and 

Auditory Physical Pain and Emotion Pain conditions. We split the data into even and odd runs in 

each individual subject and computed the average activation pattern for each split within PN - and 

MD -selective voxels. We then calculated Pearson correlation between even and odd splits of the 

data both within a network and also between networks. 

A contrast of Math > (False Belief + False Photo) was used to define an alternate MD -selective 

network (Figures S2 and S3). 

Resting -state correlations 

Having identified the PN - and MD -selective sets of voxels in each participant, we then calculated 

the correlation of their time courses during the 24 minutes of resting state fMRI (rs -fMRI) 

scanning. To do this, we first subdivided sets of voxels within each fROI based on their location 

in either the left or right hemispheres and frontal or parietal lobes. The parietal and frontal lobe 

parcels were composed of the union of PN and MD parcels within each lobe. We then averaged 

the time courses of all voxels which fall into each of the resulting eight sets ( PN - and MD -selective 

x left/right hemispheres x parietal/frontal lobes), and then calculated the Pearson correlation for 

all pairs of these time courses. Finally, we average these correlations across subjects to yield an 

8x8 similarity matrix. However, we retain only the upper or lower triangular matrix for further 

analyses as the 8x8 similarity matrix is symmetric. To assess the degree of within - versus between -

network correlation, we computed the average correlation between subregions within one network 

and compared that to the average correlation between subregions of different networks. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 

Assem, M., Blank, I. A., Mineroff, Z., Ademoğlu, A., & Fedorenko, E. (2020). Activity in the 

fronto -parietal multiple -demand network is robustly associated with individual differences in 

working memory and fluid intelligence. Cortex , 131 , 1–16. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.06.013 

Battaglia, P. W., Hamrick, J. B., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2013). Simulation as an engine of physical 

scene understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 

of America , 110 (45), 18327 –18332. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1306572110 

Buckner, R. L., & DiNicola, L. M. (2019). The brain’s default network: updated anatomy, 

physiology and evolving insights. In Nature Reviews Neuroscience (Vol. 20, Number 10, pp. 

593 –608). Nature Research. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583 -019 -0212 -7

Caspers, S., Zilles, K., Laird, A. R., & Eickhoff, S. B. (2010). ALE meta -analysis of action 

observation and imitation in the human brain. NeuroImage , 50 (3), 1148 –1167. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.112 

Casto, C., Ivanova, A., Fedorenko, E., & Kanwisher, N. (2025). What does it mean to understand 

language? http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.19757 

Corbetta , M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. L. (2008). The Reorienting System of the Human Brain: 

From Environment to Theory of Mind. In Neuron (Vol. 58, Number 3, pp. 306 –324). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2008.04.017 

Du, J., DiNicola, L. M., Angeli, P. A., Saadon -Grosman, N., Sun, W., Kaiser, S., Ladopoulou, J., 

Xue, A., Yeo, B. T. T., Eldaief, M. C., & Buckner, R. L. (2024). Organization of the human 

cerebral cortex estimated within individuals: networks, global topog raphy, and function. 

Journal of Neurophysiology , 131 (6), 1014 –1082. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00308.2023 

Duncan, J. (2010). The multiple -demand (MD) system of the primate brain: mental programs for 

intelligent behaviour. In Trends in Cognitive Sciences (Vol. 14, Number 4, pp. 172 –179). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.01.004 

Duncan, J., & Owen, A. M. (2000). Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruited by diverse 

cognitive demands. In Trends Neurosci (Vol. 23, Number 10). 

Fedorenko , E., Duncan, J., & Kanwisher, N. (2013). Broad domain generality in focal regions of 

frontal and parietal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 

States of America , 110 (41), 16616 –16621. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1315235110 

Fedorenko, E., Hsieh, P. J., Nieto -Castañón, A., Whitfield -Gabrieli, S., & Kanwisher, N. (2010). 

New method for fMRI investigations of language: Defining ROIs functionally in individual 

subjects. Journal of Neurophysiology , 104 (2), 1177 –1194. 

https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00032.2010 

Fedorenko, E., Ivanova, A. A., & Regev, T. I. (2024). The language network as a natural kind 

within the broader landscape of the human brain. In Nature Reviews Neuroscience (Vol. 25, 

Number 5, pp. 289 –312). Springer Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583 -024 -00802 -4

Fischer, J., & Mahon, B. Z. (2021). What tool representation, intuitive physics, and action have in 

common: The brain’s first -person physics engine. Cognitive Neuropsychology , 38 (7 –8), 455 –

467. https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2022.2106126 

Fischer, J., Mikhael, J. G., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Kanwisher, N. (2016). Functional neuroanatomy 

of intuitive physical inference. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 

States of America , 113 (34), E5072 –E5081. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1610344113 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C., & Raichle , M. E. (2005). 

The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. 

In PNAS July (Vol. 5). www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0504136102 

Gallivan, J. P., Adam McLean, D., Valyear, K. F., & Culham, J. C. (2013). Decoding the neural 

mechanisms of human tool use. ELife , 2013 (2). https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00425 

Gazzola, V., & Keysers , C. (2009). The observation and execution of actions share motor and 

somatosensory voxels in all tested subjects: Single -subject analyses of unsmoothed fMRI 

data. Cerebral Cortex , 19 (6), 1239 –1255. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhn181 

Goodale, M. A., & Westwood, D. A. (2004). An evolving view of duplex vision: Separate but 

interacting cortical pathways for perception and action. In Current Opinion in Neurobiology 

(Vol. 14, Number 2, pp. 203 –211). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2004.03.002 

Harvey, B. M., Fracasso, A., Petridou, N., & Dumoulin, S. O. (2015). Topographic representations 

of object size and relationships with numerosity reveal generalized quantity processing in 

human parietal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 

of America , 112 (44), 13525 –13530. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1515414112 

Harvey, B. M., Klein, B. P., Petridou, N., & Dumoulin, S. O. (2013). Topographic representation 

of numerosity in the human parietal cortex. Science , 341 (6150), 1123 –1126. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1239052 

Jacoby, N., Bruneau, E., Koster -Hale, J., & Saxe, R. (2016). Localizing Pain Matrix and Theory 

of Mind networks with both verbal and non -verbal stimuli. NeuroImage , 126 , 39 –48. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.025 

Julian, J. B., Fedorenko, E., Webster, J., & Kanwisher, N. (2012). An algorithmic method for 

functionally defining regions of interest in the ventral visual pathway. NeuroImage , 60 (4), 

2357 –2364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.055 

Kean, H. H., Fung, A., Pramod, R. T., Chomik -Morales, J., Kanwisher, N., & Fedorenko, E. (2025). 

Intuitive physical reasoning is not mediated by linguistic nor exclusively domain -general 

abstract representations. Neuropsychologia , 213 , 109125. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2025.109125 

Liu, S., Karakose -Akbiyik, S., Outa, J., & Kim, M. J. (2026). How physical information is used to 

make sense of the psychological world. Nature Reviews Psychology , 5(1), 59 –73. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159 -025 -00514 -1

Liu, S., Lydic, K., Mei, L., & Saxe, R. (2024). Violations of physical and psychological 

expectations in the human adult brain. Imaging Neuroscience , 2, 1–25. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/imag_a_00068 

Marvi, A. I., Hutchinson, S., Fedorenko, E., Saxe, R. R., Kamps , F. S., Regev, T. I., Chen, E. M., 

& Kanwisher, N. G. (2025). An efficient multifunction fMRI localizer for high -level visual, 

auditory, and cognitive regions in humans. Imaging Neuroscience , 3.

https://doi.org/10.1162/IMAG.a.905 

Mruczek, R. E. B., Von Loga, I. S., & Kastner, S. (2013). The representation of tool and non -tool 

object information in the human intraparietal sulcus. J Neurophysiol , 109 , 2883 –2896. 

https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00658.2012. -Humans 

Navarro -Cebrián , A., & Fischer, J. (2022). Precise functional connections between the dorsal 

anterior cingulate cortex and areas recruited for physical inference. European Journal of 

Neuroscience , 56 (1), 3660 –3673. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.15670 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.19.739417 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Overath, T., McDermott, J. H., Zarate, J. M., & Poeppel, D. (2015). The cortical analysis of speech -

specific temporal structure revealed by responses to sound quilts. Nature Neuroscience , 18 (6), 

903 –911. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4021 

Paulun, V. C., Pramod, R. R. T., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Kanwisher, N. (2025). Dissociable cortical 

regions represent things and stuff in the human brain. Current Biology , 35 (17), 4075 -4083.e4. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2025.07.027 

Pramod, R. T., Cohen, M. A., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Kanwisher, N. (2022). Invariant representation 

of physical stability in the human brain. ELife , 11 . https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.71736 

Pramod, R. T., Mieczkowski , E., Fang, C. X., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Kanwisher, N. (2025). 

Decoding predicted future states from the brain’s “physics engine.” In Sci. Adv (Vol. 11). 

https://www.science.org 

Rigotti, M., Barak, O., Warden, M. R., Wang, X. J., Daw, N. D., Miller, E. K., & Fusi, S. (2013). 

The importance of mixed selectivity in complex cognitive tasks. Nature , 497 (7451), 585 –

590. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12160 

Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about thinking people: The role of the temporo -

parietal junction in “theory of mind.” NeuroImage , 19 (4), 1835 –1842. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053 -8119(03)00230 -1

Schwettmann, S. E., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Kanwisher, N. (2019). Invariant representations of mass 

in the human brain. ELife , 8. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.46619 

Szczepanski, S. M., Pinsk, M. A., Douglas, M. M., Kastner, S., & Saalmann , Y. B. (2013). 

Functional and structural architecture of the human dorsal frontoparietal attention network. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 110 (39), 

15806 –15811. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1313903110 

Valyear, K. F., Cavina -Pratesi, C., Stiglick, A. J., & Culham, J. C. (2007). Does tool -related fMRI 

activity within the intraparietal sulcus reflect the plan to grasp? NeuroImage , 36 (SUPPL. 2). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.03.031