Title: NMDA receptor-dependent Hebbian plasticity refines hippocampal spatial representations during two-dimensional navigation learning

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
NMDA receptor -dependent Hebbian plasticity refines 

# hippocampal spatial representations during two -dimensional 

# navigation learning 

Ronen Reshef 1,7, *, Mina Shahi 1,7 , Victoria Ho 1,3 , Matthias Ollivier 2, Ahmet Arac 1, Ariel Cohen 1, David 

Yamin 1, Amanda Tran 1, Ruth Tjondropurnomo 1, Baljit S. Khakh 2, Daniel Aharoni 1, Thomas J. O’Dell 2,

Peyman Golshani 1,3,4,5 ,6, * 

1. Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 

Angeles, CA, USA .

2. Department of Physiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 

Angeles, CA, USA .

3. Greater Los Angeles VA Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA .

4. Semel Institute of Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 

California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA .

5. Intellectual and Developmental Disability Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, 

University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA .

6. Integrative Center for Learning and Memory, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, 

Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA .

7. These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Author contributions 

R.R. and P.G. designed the experiments. R.R. performed the experiments. M.S. analyzed the data. R.R. 

and M.S. generated the figures. V.H. helped with RNA scope and histology. M.O. helped with designing 

the CRISPR constructs. T.J.O helped with slice physiology. R.R. and P.G. wrote the paper. 

* Corresponding authors: Ronen Reshef:  RReshef@mednet.ucla.edu . Peyman Golshani: 

PGolshani@mednet.ucla.edu .

Abstract 

Hippocampal place cell activity represents an animal’s location in space; yet, how 

hippocampal neuronal population dynamics change with spatial learning and the 

mechanisms underlying these activity changes, which drive allocentric navigation to a 

learned goal , are poorly understood. To address these questions, we performed calcium 

imaging with a novel wire -free waterproof miniaturized microscope to image the activity of 

large populations of hippocampal CA1 neurons during spatial learning of a two -

dimensional navigational task, the Morris water maze. We followed the same cells during 

learning and were able to directly examine how each neuron in the ensemble, and the 

ensemble as a whole , changes its response properties. We found that neuronal spatial 

selectivity increased and population decoding of spatial location improved as mice learned 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to navigate to the goal. Viral CRISPR knock out of Grin1 (encoding the essential GluN1 

NMDA receptor subunit) in dorsal hippocampal neurons, dramatically reduced long -term 

potentiation in CA1. This manipulation also prevented the increase in spatial selectivity 

and improvement of population decoding with spatial learnin g and resulted in learning 

deficits in the Morris water maze . Together , our results show that dorsal hippocampus 

NMDAR -dependent synaptic plasticity is essential for the learning -dependent re finement 

of CA1 place selectivity and improvement in population decoding of space .

Introduction 

To survive , animals must use distal cues to navigate the best route to specific remembered 

locations in space . Navigation using distal cues has been hypothesized to be based on the 

representation of spatial locations in hippocampal CA1 neurons termed place cells , which 

collectively form a cognitive map of the environment (1). Several studies have shown that 

the dorsal hippocampal region is critical for learning and performance of a goal -directed 2-

dimensional (2D) spatial navigation task using distal cues (2, 3). However, whether CA1 

neuronal place representations are shaped by learning and the mechanisms underlying 

these changes that drive allocentric navig ation to a goal in a 2D environment are poorly 

understood. 

Several studies have shown that spatial learning results in an accumulation or 

reorganization of place fields near the goal (4–8). This reorganization may mark the goal (9),

but in 2D navigation , it cannot explain how animals navigate using direct paths to the goal 

when they are remote from this goal and not activating the added place fields . Other 

studies have found improved precision of coding for place in individual cells during learning 

in one -dimensional environments or during 2D random foraging , both of which impose 

minimal navigational demand s (10 –13 ). Although N-methyl -D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) 

dependent synaptic plasticity was hypothesized as a plausible mechanism mediating 

learning -dependent changes in place cell precision (14 , 15 ) and deletion of this receptor in 

the hippocampus was shown to degrade spatial representations (16 –18 ), these findings 

were obtained in constrained non -navigation -directed settings .

One study employing virtual reality navigation in 2D found evidence of distance coding and 

path integration in CA1 , rather than alterations in spatial coding after spatial learning (19 ),

offering an alternative explanation for the neural dynamics underlying learning . Yet, given 

that navigation in virtual reality dramatically alters place coding in 2D (20 ), this approach 

may force animals to rely on alternative strategies. 

It has remained a major challenge to follow the representations of the same neurons 

during learning in a well -controlled 2D freely behaving spatial navigation task , and to probe 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the mechanisms underlying spatial learning by causally manipulating plasticity in the same 

population. To meet this challenge, we examine d how place cell representations in the 

same neurons are shaped by spatial learning across days in a 2D allocentric navigational 

task . We f oun d that hippocampal spatial representations become more precise after 

learning the Morris water maze , and that these changes are prevented by CRISPR deletion 

of NMDA receptors in the dorsal hippocampus , a manipulation that block ed long -term 

potentiation and prevent ed learning. 

Results 

To study how spatial representations change during spatial learning , we monitored 

hippocampal neural activity by performing calcium imaging with wire -free miniaturized 

microscopes (21 , 22 ). We chose to image CA1 activity while animals performed the Morris 

water maze (MWM) hidden platform test, because in this task animals are forced to use a 

single navigational strategy by using distal visual cues to locate a goal in a 2D arena (23 ).

Furthermore, the task has been highly validated in the learning and memory literature and 

proven to be hippocampal -dependent (24 ).

To image in the MWM, we used wire -free water -proof miniaturized microscopes and 

minimized the weight load by attaching each miniscope to three helium balloons (Fig. 1, A; 

see Methods). We imaged animals as they performed a well -established behavioral 

protocol; animals performed 3 blocks of behavior, with each block consisting of 4 

consecutive trials, completing 12 trials daily. This protocol resulted in increased imaging 

time compared to other variants of the MWM with fewer trials, allowing us to better pro be 

neural mechanisms of spatial learning (25 ) (see Methods ). Over 6 days of training, mice 

displayed a significant progressive reduction in the latency to locate the platform (Fig. 1, B). 

Search trajectories varied until reaching maximum performance on Day 6 (Supplement Fig. 

1, A). Because animals found the platform more rapidly on Day 6 resulting in reduced 

imaging time, we added another 12 -24 trials on Day 6 after the probe trial to equalize the 

time imaged. On Day 1, animals searched for the maze relatively uniformly, while on Day 6 

animals took more direct paths to the goal (Fig. 1, C). Probe memory test trials performed 

on Day 3 and Day 6, showed that there was a significant increase in exploration of the 

target quadrant on Day 6 but not on Day 3, demonstrating that animals had learned the 

location of the platform by Day 6 (Fig. 1, D -E; Supplement Fig. 1, B -C). 

Improvement of place tuning in CA1 neurons after spatial learning 

We imaged neural activity in CA1 during the task acquisition by injecting mice with AAV1 -

syn -GCaMP7f into CA1 and implanting a GRIN lens directly above the stratum oriens ( Fig. 

1, F). To measure learning -related changes in spatial tuning of CA1 neurons, we used the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

binning method of summing the activity in each spatial bin divided by the occupancy in that 

bin (26 ). We focused on the activity recorded on Day 1 before learning and Day 6 after 

learning. Around 1,800 neurons were imaged throughout the training days from 10 animals 

(Fig. 1, G). We used the deconvolved calcium traces of each neuron to study its firing 

properties (Fig.1, H). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig 1: Imaging the CA1 neuronal population during spatial learning in the MWM. 

(a) Schematic of experimental setup. (b) Progression of learning in the MWM across six 

days of training in the MWM, as measured by latency to reach the platform on each trial, 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint averaged for each day (n= 10 mice; *** P < 0.001, paired t-test ). (c) Spatial occupancy in the 

maze across all trials of Day 1 and Day 6, measured as percentage of time spent in each 

maze location for each imaging day. (d) Spatial memory performance in the probe trial on 

Day 3, quantified as the proportion of time spe nt in the quadrant of the learned platform 

location – Q1 (n=10 mice; * P < 0.0167; P= 0.08; P= 0.115) and the number of crossings of 

the platform location – Q1 (n= 10 mice; P = 0.0642; P= 0.281; P= 0.167). (e) Spatial memory 

performance in the probe of Day 6, quantified as the proportion of time spent in the 

quadrant of the learned platform location – Q1 (n= 10 mice; *** P < 0.001) and the number 

of crossings of the platform location – Q1 (n= 10 mice; ** P < 0.01). (f) Left: schematic of the 

virus injection and location of lens implantation above the CA1 region of the hippocampus. 

Histological section showing the aspiration cavity of the GRIN lens and CA1 cells 

expressing GCaMP7f (green). DAPI nuclear counterstain shown in blue. Middle : raw 

GCAMP7f fluorescence of the field of view from an example animal . Right: single neurons 

segmented from the field of view by CNMF -E. (g) The number of neurons imaged across 

training in the MWM (n= 10 mice; P= 0.5 76 ; paired t-test ). (h) Example of calcium traces 

from 10 neurons and deconvolved spikes extracted from them using the Oasis package. 

Statistical test in Figures 1d and 1e was performed with planned paired t-tests with 

Bonferroni correction. 

To understand how tuning changes in the same population of neurons before and after 

learning, we mainly analyzed neurons that were active both on Day 1 and Day 6. We 

registered these neurons across days using the CellReg algorithm (27 ). 680 neurons 

recorded across 10 mice could be registered across Day 1 and Day 6 (Fig. 2, A). To quantify 

the precision of spatial tuning in these neurons, we calculated a commonly used spatial 

sparsity measure that examines how selectively each neuron fires across specific positions 

in the arena (28 , 29 ) (see Methods) . We chos e sparsity to quantify spatial precision tuning 

because it is less sensitive to the limited sampling bias (30 –32 ). Some neurons fired in a 

non -selective manner throughout the arena on Day 1, thereby exhibiting low spatial 

sparsity. However, on Day 6, the same cells showed more spatially selective firing in 

different locations of the maze, exhibiting increased spa tial sparsity (Fig. 2, B). To ensure 

that differences in behavioral sampling between Day 1 and Day 6 do not confound these 

results (Fig 2, B; Fig . 1, C), we circularly shuffled the firing of neurons and calculated the 

sparsity of shuffled firing for each neuron (see Methods). To control for the changes in 

behavioral sampling, we subtracted the 95 th percentile of the sparsity measured for 

shuffled trials from those recorded during exploration for each neuron. The cumulative 

distributions of the shuffle -subtracted sparsity values of all animals were statistically 

different on Day 1 and Day 6, with sparsity increasing on Day 6 (Fig. 2, C). The sparsity was 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

also greater when we averaged the population shuffle -subtracted sparsity scores for each 

animal and compared the average of all animals from Day 1 to Day 6 . The average shuffle -

subtracted sparsity scores on each day became negative because 95 th percentile of the 

shuffle is higher than most cells' sparsity scores ; however , importantly, the rise in the 

sparsity averages exhibits the learning -dependent changes (Fig. 2. C). The calcium event 

frequency was similar on Day 6 compared to Day 1 (Supplement Fig. 2 , A). The speed of the 

animals, a known modulator of hippocampal activity (33 ), was not different on these two 

imaging days (Supplement Fig. 2, B). Results were similar if all neurons imaged were 

studied, rather than neurons that were only active on both Day 1 and Day 6 (Fig. 2, D). To 

more carefully control the behavioral bias and to equalize the number of occupied bins, we 

subsampled Day 1 behavior to match that of Day 6. Using only the same positions (bins) 

that were visited on both days, as well as using the same amount of data across the days 

as before , we repeated the analysis . Consistent with previous results, we found the 95 th 

percentile shuffle -subtracted sparsity rising on Day 6 compared to Day 1 in the shared cells 

(Supplement Fig. 2, C -D) , and in all the cells imaged (Supplement Fig. 2, E -F). Therefore, 

the precision of spatial firing of individual cells increases in CA1 with learning on the MWM. 

Improvement of population decoding for position with learning 

Since the single -cell analysis suggested improved selectivity for space after spatial 

learning , w e asked whether the CA1 neuronal population allows more accurate decoding of 

the location of the animal after learning. We trained a feedforward artificial neural network 

(FFN) (34 ), to decode the location of the animal from the calcium traces of the imaged CA1 

neurons before and after spatial learning (Fig. 2, E). Again, we only analyzed a comparable 

number of neurons that were active both on Day 1 before learning and Day 6 after le arning. 

We also equalized the training and testing time between Day 1 and Day 6 for a fair 

comparison (see Methods). Examination of multiple e xample trials demonstrat ed that the 

decoding appeared to improve with learning (Fig . 2, F). To quantify improvemen ts in 

decoding performance with learning , we computed the decoded spatial location error by 

calculating the distance between the decoded location and the original location of the 

animal (see Methods). To ensure that changes in the patterns of behavioral exploration did 

not influence our decoder results , we calculated the shuffled decoded error and 

subtracted the 95 th percentile of the shuffled decod ed error from the recorded decoded 

error for Day 1 and Day 6 accordingly. Indeed, t here was a significant reduction in the 

shuffle -subtracted decoding error for location on Day 6 compared to Day 1 , demonstrating 

that decoding performance improv ed with learning . The shuff le -subtracted decoded error 

went below zero on Day 6 as the recorded decoded error was lower than the shuffled 

decoded error ( Fig. 2, G). To further demonstrate that the decoder could track the spatial 

trajectory of the animal more accurately after learning, we calculated the correlation 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

coefficient between the decoded x and y coordinates and the true x and y coordinates both 

on Day 1 and Day 6. Again, to account for changes in exploration from Day 1 to Day 6, we 

shuffle -subtracted the 95 th percentile of the measured correlation coefficients. We found 

that on Day 6 there was a significant rise in the shuffle -subtracted decoded correlation 

compared to Day 1 , demonstrating an improvement in the decoded spatial trajectory of the 

animal (Fig. 2 , G). To account for the behavioral bias , we subsam pled Day 1 behavior by 

Day 6, choosing only locations visited on both days while equalizing recording time on both 

days. The decoder consistently predicted the location and trajectory of the animal more 

accurately on Day 6 compared to Day 1 (Supplement Fig. 2, G -H). Together, these results 

indicate that the location of the animal can be more precisely decoded from the CA1 

neuronal population after spatial learning. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig 2: Population of CA1 neurons increases selectivity for place with spatial learning in 

the MWM. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint (a) Example of neuron footprints registered as being the same neurons by CellReg on Day 1 

and Day 6. Insets: All neurons in white and registered neurons in green. (b) Left column: 

Heat map of the activity of the imaged neurons on Day 1 and Day 6 with deconvolved 

events color coded in black . Right column: The same heat map without the deconvolved 

events . (c) Left: Cumulative histogram of the shuffle -subtracted sparsity scores from all the 

shared neurons on Day 1 and Day 6 (n=10 mice; *** P < 0.001 Kolmogorov -Smirnov test). 

Right: The average shuffle -subtracted sparsity scores of shared neurons on Day 1 and Day 

6 (n= 10 mice; * * P< 0.0 1; paired t-test). (d) Left: Cumulative histogram of the shuffle -

subtracted sparsity scores from all neurons imaged on Day 1 and Day 6 (n=10 mice; *** P <

0.001; Ko lmogorov -Smirnov test). Right: The average shuffle -subtracted sparsity scores of 

all neurons imaged on Day 1 and Day 6 (n= 10 mice; * P < 0.0 5; paired t-test). (e) Decoding 

the location of the animal from the CA1 population activity using a neural network 

supervised deep learning approach (blue and red rectangles represent adjacent bins or 

chunks of the neural data inputted into the decoder) . (f) Example trial of location decoding 

of x and y coordinates in the maze in separate graphs on Day 1 and Day 6 as a function of 

time. Green traces reflect the true position of the animal , and gray traces depict the 

decoded position. (g) Shuffle -subtracted position decoding error calculated by least mean 

squares on Day 1 and Day 6 (n= 10 mice; * P < 0.05). Right: Shuffle -subtracted correlation 

coefficient (r) between the decoded and true x,y position s on Day 1 and Day 6 (n= 10 mice; 

* P < 0.05). Statistical analysis performed using a paired t-test. 

Viral CRISPR -Cas9 deletion of the neuronal NMDA receptor subunit GluN1 in dorsal 

hippocampus impairs synaptic plasticity and spatial learning in the MWM 

Next, we sought to elucidate the neuronal mechanism that drove the increases we found in 

spatial selectivity and behavioral performance over the course of learning . It is known that 

the pharmacological antagonism of NMDA -receptor s or transgenic knockout of NMDA 

receptor subunits in the forebrain impairs synaptic plasticity and spatial learning in the 

MWM (35 –37 ). However, whether dorsal hippocampus NMDA receptor activation was also 

essential for the improvements in hippocampal spatial coding during spatial learning is not 

yet known. To answer these question s, we used a novel viral CRISPR -Cas9 strategy to 

delete Grin1 , the gene encoding the essential NMDA receptor subunit GluN1, in dorsal 

hippocampal neurons (38 , 39 ). We confirmed a bilateral dorsal hippocampal injection of 

AAV virus expressing a small Cas9 (SaCas9) and a guide RNA targeting the Grin1 gene 

(GluN1 -CRISPR) under the neuronal promoter ( hSyn1 ), decreased Grin1 gene expression in 

the animals that underwent the imaging experiments. Control animals were injected with 

an AAV containing SaCas9 without the guide RNA (40 ). One of the dorsal hippocampi was 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

co -injected with an AAV -syn -GCaMP7f for probing the physiological effects of the NMDAR 

deletion (Fig . 3, A). We allowed 6 weeks for the deletion of the Grin1 gene (39 ). To 

characterize Grin1 deletion, we performed RNA -scope and quantified its transcripts in the 

dorsal hippocampi. I njection of G luN1 -CRISPR reduced Grin1 mRNA significantly by 60 +/ -

15 percent in both dorsal hippocampi (as measured by total expression in CA1, CA3, and 

dentate gyrus) as well as specifically by 80 +/ - 6 percent in CA1 compared to controls (Fig. 

3, B -C). We calculated the proportion GCaMP7f neurons co -expressing GluN1 -CRISPR (by 

staining for SaCas9 -HA) and found that 62 +/ - 11 percent of GCaMP7f expressing neurons 

also express ed GluN1 -CRISPR in CA1 (Fig . 3, D). A similar proportion of GCAMP7f 

expressing neurons expressed the control viral construct (Fig . 3, D). There was very little 

expression of the G luN 1-CRISPR outside the dorsal hippocampus ( Supplement Fig. 3 , A-B). 

To ensure that G luN1 deletion had a robust functional effect on hippocampal plasticity, we 

performed field potential recordings from hippocampal slices from a separate group of 

GLuN1 -CRISPR or CRISPR injected controls and measured long -term potentiation (LTP) of 

Schaffer collateral responses. We reasoned that since NMDA receptor signaling is 

essential for high -frequency stimulation (HFS) LTP induction , then CRISPR deletion of Grin1 

in a sufficient proportion of neurons should decrease the magnitude of LTP in these slices 

(35 , 38 ). Indeed, the CRISPR induced Grin1 deletion resulted in a dramatic reduction in 

HFS induced LTP compared to controls (Fig. 3, E). Behavioral time -scale plasticity (BTSP), a 

novel form of plasticity that mediates the rapid formation of place cells in CA1 pyramidal 

neurons in -vivo, is also NMDAR -dependent (41 ). Thus, we also tested the effects of G lu N1 -

CRISPR deletion on a complex -spike burst -dependent form of BTSP (42 ), and found a very 

strong reduction in BTSP in the G lu N1 CRISPR group in comparison to controls (Fig. 3, F). 

Therefore, GluN1 -CRISPR expression dramatically reduces multiple forms of long -term 

potentiation in CA1. 

We examined the effect of Grin1 deletion on spatial learning in the MWM . These 

experiments were performed on the same mice that were examined histolog ically for Grin1 

deletion and co -expression with GCaMP7f . We found that CRISPR control -injected animals 

showed a progressive decrease in the latency to reach the platform during the 6 days of the 

MWM behavior . On the other hand, GluN1 -CRISPR injected animals did not show a 

significant decrease in the latency to platform by Day 6 (Fig. 3, G) , indicating that spatial 

learning was impaired in these mice . On Day 1, both the CRISPR -control and G luN1 -

CRISPR injected animals searched the maze in a uniform manner . On Day 6 controls chose 

direct paths to the goal or mostly searched near the platform area , while GluN1 -CRISPR 

injected animals still searched the maze in a mostly uniform manner (Fig. 3 , H; see 

Methods). During the probe memory test, CRISPR -control injected mice mostly focused 

their search around the target quadrant on Day 3, and this search became even mor e

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

tightly focused on the target quadrant on Day 6. On the other hand, the GluN1 -CRISPR 

injected mice group searched all quadrants equally on Day 3 and did not search the target 

quadrant more than the other quadrants on Day 6 (Fig . 3, I -G). To ensure that a lack of 

motivation or motor deficits could not explain the poor performance of GluN1 -CRISPR 

injected animals, we performed 6 blocks of visible platform experiments after the last day 

of training over two days (43 ). We found no difference between the CRISPR -controls and 

GluN1 -CRISPR groups in the latency to reach the visible platform ( Supplement Fig. 3 , C). 

Together, these results show that viral CRISPR -Cas9 deletion of Grin1 in the dorsal 

hippocampus can impair spatial learning in the MWM task. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig 3: Dorsal hippocampus CRISPR knockdown of neuronal GluN1 reduces burst -dependent 

synaptic potentiation and spatial learning in the MWM. 

(a) AAVs used for neuronal -specific CRISPR -Cas9 gene knockdown in bilateral dorsal hippocampi 

as well as co -injected AAV for expression of GCAMP7f in the right dorsal hippocampus. (b) Confocal 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint images of RNA scope for the Grin1 mRNA in mice injected with the control virus or the GluN1 -

CRISPR virus. Insets show magnified images of CA1 in both groups. (c) Quantification of the total 

amount of Grin1 stained puncta in control virus -injected and GluN1 -CRISPR injected animals, 

either analyzed across all hippocampal subfields (left; n= 4 controls; n= 5 GluN1 -CRISPR; * P<

0.05), or just in CA1 ( right ; n= 4 controls; n= 5 GluN1 -CRISPR; * P< 0.05). (d) Confocal image of an 

enlarged part of CA1 stained for Grin1 mRNA in orange , GCamp7f in green and CRISPR -HA tag in 

red. Co -stained cells expressing HA and GCaMP7f are ma rked in yellow. Graphs show the number 

of co -stained neurons in control virus and GluN1 -CRISPR injected animals that underwent imaging 

experiments, either analyzed across all hippocampal subfields (left; n=4 controls; n=5 GluN1 -

CRISPR; P= 0.336), or just in CA1 (right; n=4 controls; n=5 Glu N1-CRISPR ; P= 0.84). (e) Left: HFS 

induced LTP ( 100Hz delivered at time = 0) in slices of mice injected with the control virus or the 

GluN1 -CRISPR virus. Right: HFS -induced LTP is significantly reduced in slices of Glu N1-CRISPR 

injected mice ( control: 6 slices, n=3 mice; GluN1 -CRISPR : 8 slices, n=4 mice; * P< 0.0 5). (f) Left: 

BTSP induced by theta -pulse stimulation (5 Hz stimulation for 15 sec delivered at time = 0 ) in slices 

of CRISPR -control and GluN1 -CRISPR injected animals. Right: BTSP is significantly reduced in 

slices of Glu N1-CRISPR injected mice ( control: 6 slices, n=3 mice; GluN1 -CRISPR : 8 slices, n=4 

mice; *** P< 0.001). (g) Time to platform changes across 6 days of training in the MWM in mice 

injected with the control virus or the GluN1 -CRISPR virus. Control injected mice show normal 

learning progression while GluN1 -CRISPR injected mice exhibit an impairment in learning ( blue; 

n=7 controls ; *** P < 0.001; magenta; n= 7 GluN1 -CRISPR ; P= 0.673; paired t-tests ). (h) Spatial 

occupancy in the maze across all trials of Day 1 and Day 6 of one animal injected with control virus 

and one injected with the GluN1 -CRISPR virus. (i) Over laid trajectories of all the virus injected 

control and GluN1 -CRISPR injected mice during performance of the probe trial on Day 3 and Day 6. 

(j) Left: Spatial memory performance in mice injected with the control virus during the probe trial of 

Day 3. Quantified as the proportion of time spent exploring the learned platform quadrant – Q1 

(blue; n= 7 mice; P= 0.017; ** P< 0.01; *** P< 0.001) or in mice injected with GluN1 -CRISPR virus 

(magenta; n= 7 mice; P= 0.14; P= 0.89; P= 0.6). Right: Number of platform crossings during the Day 

3 probe trial in mice injected with the control virus (blue; n= 7 mice; * P< 0.0167; *** P< 0.001; *** 

P< 0.001) , or in mice injected with GluN1 -CRISPR virus (magenta; n= 7 mice; P= 0.37; P= 0.23; P= 

0.68). Statistical analysis was performed using two -way ANOVA with repeated measures between 

the groups for occupancy or crossings separately. In each measure within each group we used 

planned paired t-test comparisons with Bonferroni correction for the d ifferent quadrants. (k) Left: 

Spatial memory performance in mice injected with the control virus during the probe trial of Day 6. 

Quantified as the proportion of time spent exploring the learned platform quadrant – Q1 (blue; n=7 

mice; * P< 0.0167; *** P< 0.01; *** P< 0.001) or in GluN1 -CRISPR virus injected mice (magenta; n=7 

mice; P= 0.097; P= 0.052; P= 0.46). Right: Number of platform crossings during the Day 6 probe trial 

in mice injected with the control virus (blue; n=7 mice; * P< 0.0167; *** P< 0.001; *** P< 0.001) or in 

mic e injected with GluN1 -CRISPR virus (magenta; n=7 mice; P= 0.36; P= 0.36; P= 0.61). Statistical 

analysis was performed using two -way ANOVA with repeated measures between the groups for 

occupancy or crossings separately. In each measure within each group we used planned paired t-

test comparisons with Bonferroni correction for the different quadrants. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Hippocampal NMDA receptors are essential for improved spatial selectivity with 

learning 

To examine whether G luN1 -CRISPR deletion prevents the improvement of place selectivity 

in CA1 neurons with spatial learning, we imaged the activity of CA1 neurons in the same 

animals that underwent bilateral Grin1 deletion and the CRISPR control animals co -

injected with GCaMP7f as they performed the MWM over 6 days. We imaged nearly 700 

neurons across 7 animals per group over 6 days (Supplement Fig. 4, A). We focused on 

neurons that were active on both Day 1 and Day 6 (nearly 315 shared neurons in each 

grou p, with no significant difference in group averages) (Supplement Fig. 4, B). In CRISPR -

control injected animals, similarly to previous experiments , some neurons showed 

scattered firing during Day 1, exhibiting low sparsity for space. On Day 6 however , the same 

neurons showed much more spatially selective firing in different locations in the maze (Fig. 

4, A). In contrast, in G luN1 -CRISPR injected mice , most neurons showed scattered firing 

with no clear location firing on Day 1 and on Day 6 (Fig. 4, A). As before, we calculated the 

sparsity measure and the shuffled sparsity for each neuron in CRISPR -control and G luN1 -

CRISPR injected mice. Consistent with the previous experiments , the CRISPR -control 

group cumulative distribution showed a significant shif t to higher shuffle -subtracted 

sparsity values on Day 6 compared to Day 1. On the other hand, there was no increase in 

the cumulative distribution of shuffle -subtracted sparsity values in the G luN1 -CRISPR 

group on Day 1 compared to Day 6 (Fig. 4, B). Results were similar when shuffle -subtracted 

sparsity was averaged for each animal and the values from the two groups of animals were 

compared. In the CRISPR -controls there was a significant increase in shuffle -subtracted 

sparsity between Day 1 and Day 6, while in the G luN1 -CRISPR group there was no increase 

in shuffle -subtracted sparsity (Fig. 4, B). Calcium event frequency was similar in the two 

groups and between Day 1 to Day 6 (Supplement Fig. 4, C). The swimming speed of 

CRISPR -control injected mice and GluN1 -CRISPR injected mice were not different between 

Day 1 and Day 6 (Supplement Fig. 4, D). Including all neurons imaged in the analysis 

instead of only those with activity on both Day 1 and Day 6 resulted in similar findings (Fig. 

4, C). We again controlled the behavioral bias by subsampling Day 1 behavior by Day 6. 

Similarly, the results showed an increase in the shuffle -subtracted sparsity in Day 6 as 

opposed to Day 1 in the shared cells (Supplement Fig. 4, E -F) as well as in all the cells 

imaged (Supplement Fig. 4, G-H). Therefore, these results show ed that the deletion of 

Grin1 prevent ed increases in spatial sparsity of individual cells with learning. 

To determine whether Grin1 deletion prevent ed the improvement in position decoding from 

the population activity during learning, we used the FFN model for spatial location 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

decoding as before. Examination of multiple e xample trials suggested that spatial decoding 

improved from Day 1 to Day 6 CRISPR -control injected animals but not in GluN1 -CRISPR 

injected animals (Fig. 4, D). Consistent with this , CRISPR -control animals showed a 

significant reduction in 95th percentile shuffle -subtracted error between the decoded and 

real position on Day 6 compared to Day 1. However, in the CRISPR -GLuN1 injected group 

there was no change in the shuffle -subtracted decoding error of position between Day 1 to 

Day 6 (Fig. 4, E). CRISPR -control injected mice showed a significant increase in the shuffle -

subtracted decoded correlation between Day 1 to Day 6, while the G luN1 -CRISPR did not 

show any change in this measure (Fig. 4, E). Controlling for the behavioral bias, by using 

only positions visited both in Day 1 and Day 6 while equalizing the recording time , resulted 

in similar findings. In CRISPR -control injected mice t he shuffle -subtracted decoded error 

was reduced on Day 6 as compared to Day 1 and the shuffle -subtracted correlation 

coefficient increased , suggesting improved trajectory prediction . On the other hand, 

GluN1 -CRISPR injected mice did not show any change in these measures (Supplement Fig. 

4, I-J). Therefore, improvements in hippocampal spatial coding and spatial decoding with 

learning on the MWM rely on NMDA receptor -dependent synaptic plasticity or activity .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig 4: Dorsal hippocampus Grin1 CRISPR deletion prevents improvement in place selectivity 

of the CA1 neuronal population after spatial learning in the MWM. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint (a) Left column: Heat maps of the activity of the imaged neurons on Day 1 and Day 6 with 

deconvolved events color coded in black. Right column: The same heat maps without the 

deconvolved events. (b) Left: Cumulative histogram of the shuffle -subtracted sparsity scores from 

the shared neurons on Day 1 and Day 6 for control virus injected mice (n= 7 mice; *** P < 0.001). 

Right: Cumulative histogram of the shuffle -subtracted sparsity scores from the shared neurons on 

Day 1 and Day 6 for G luN1 -CRISPR injected mic e (n= 7 mice; P = 0.927 ). Statistical analysis was 

performed using the Kolmogorov -Smirnov test. Bottom: The average shuffle -subtracted sparsity 

scores of shared neurons on Day 1 and Day 6 of control virus injected mice (blue; n=7 mice; * P <

0.05) or GluN1 -CRISPR injected mice (magenta; n= 7 mice; P= 0.59). Statistical analysis was 

performed using paired t-tests. (c) Left: Cumulative histogram of the shuffle -subtracted sparsity 

scores from all the neurons imaged on Day 1 and Day 6 of control virus injected mice (blue; n= 7

mice; *** P < 0.001). Middle: The average shuffle -subtracted sparsity scores of all the neurons 

imaged on Day 1 and Day 6 of G luN1 -CRISPR injected mice (magenta; n= 7 mice; P= 0. 26 7). 

Statistical analysis was performed using the Kolmogorov -Smirnov test. Right: The average shuffle -

subtracted sparsity scores of all neurons imaged on Day 1 and Day 6 of control virus injected mice. 

(blue; n= 7 mice; * P < 0.0 5): or GLuN1 -CRISPR injected mice (magenta; n= 7 mice; P= 0. 942 ). 

Statistical analysis was performed using paired t-tests. (d) Left: Example trial of location decoding 

of x and y coordinates in the maze in separate graphs on Day 1 and Day 6 as a function of time of 

control virus injected mice , with (blue) representing the original position and (gray) representing the 

decoded position , or of G luN1 -CRISPR injected mice with (magenta) representing the original 

position and (gray) representing the decoded position. (e) Up: Shuffle -subtracted position decoding 

error average calculated by least mean squares on Day 1 and Day 6 in control virus injected mice 

(blue; n= 7 mice; * P < 0.05) or in G luN1 -CRISPR injected mice (magenta; n= 7 mice; P= 0.52). 

Bottom: Shuffle -subtracted correlation average between the decoded and true x,y position on Day 1 

and Day 6 in control virus injected mice. (blue; n= 7 mice; * P < 0.05) or in G luN1 -CRISPR injected 

mice (magenta; n= 7 mice; P= 0.35). Statistical analysis performed using paired t-tests. 

Discussion 

We measured spatial representations in the hippocampus throughout learning by imaging 

the same population of neurons during free allocentric navigati on in 2D . We discovered 

that CA1 place coding became more precise after learning to navigate to a goal , in 

accordance with the prediction that cognitive map representation acuity increases with 

learning of a new environment (44 ). The conditional d eletion of NMDA receptor subunits in 

the dorsal hippocampus using CRISPR , which impaired two forms of long -term 

potentiation in CA1 , prevented learning -related changes in place cell precision and spatial 

navigation learning .

We examined the changes in hippocampal neural dynamics in a well -controlled 2D free 

navigation task using distal visual cues (23 ). The use of a water maze enabled us to 

eliminate any confounding factor of odor left on the goal in dry mazes. Also, since the goal 

was hidden , the animals could only use the distal visual cues and not use any alternative 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

strategy. Using the water maze also allowed us to directly apply our findings to the 

multitude of studies performed using this paradigm (24 , 45 , 46 ). To make sure that animals 

used an allocentric strategy to navigate to the reward each trial had a random different 

starting point from a total of eight locations . Last, by imaging the exact same cells before 

and after learning, we were able to directly examine how each neuron in the ensemble, and 

the ensemble as a whole, changes its response properties. We found improvements in 

place cell precision and improved decoding of spatial location after learning. Our findings 

were not explained by changes in the behavior of the animals , as we performed shuffled 

subtraction of our sparsity and decoding measure s, as well as further controls w here we 

only probed changes in firing the same loca tions visited before and after learning. 

We found that NMDA receptor deletion prevents learning -related improvements in place 

cell precision and subsequent 2D navigation learning . This manipulation also impaired two 

forms of long -term potentiation recorded in CA1 , suggesting these plasticity impairments 

are responsible for the lack of place precision improvements. However, NMDA receptor 

deletion was limited to the dorsal hippocampus but was not limited to individual subfields 

within the hippocampus. Therefore, it is possible that diminished plasticity within DG or 

CA3 also play a role in the failure of learning -related impro vements in place field precision 

in CA1 with learning (47 ). Because our deletions were performed in adult animals, we can 

be sure that the results we observed were not the result of loss of NMDA signaling on the 

development of hippocampal circuits. 

Our results differ from those of a recent study in rats performing 2D virtual navigation using 

visual cues , where there was no improvement in CA1 place coding with learning, but the 

emergence of path integration representations (19 ). These differences could arise because 

of poor place cell firing in the restricted virtual reality environment , forcing the animals to 

adopt a path integration strategy (20 , 48 ).

The improvement in place tuning precision that was found to accompany the allocentric 

learning suggests that improved precision may explain the improved navigational 

performance. However, the association between these two phenomena do es not prove 

they are causally related. Further experiments will be needed. 

Future studies will also probe the effect of hippocampal subregion and cell -type specific 

manipulations on place cell precision improvement and 2D spatial learning . Unlike other 

behavioral arenas, our behavioral paradigm did not allow us to examine changes in vector 

cells , which only fire when the animal is heading toward the goal location (49 , 50 ). Further 

experiments in other environments will be needed to determine how these responses 

change with learning and whether NMDA receptor activation is necessary for these 

learning -related changes. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Experimental methods 

Animals 

All experimental protocols were approved by the Chancellor’s Animal Research Committee 

of the University of California, Los Angeles, in accordance with the U.S. National Institutes 

of Health (NIH) guidelines. For water maze experiments, 10 -week -old hybrid male 

B6129SF1/J1 mice (Jackson Laboratories, 10143) were group housed (2 –5 mice per cage) 

on a 12 –hour light –dark cycle for all experiments. Hybrid mice were used because they 

were able to learn the task more reliably than C57Bl6 mice (51 ). Male mice were used 

because they are larger than females at the appropriate adult age, and thus were able to 

swim and perform the task better while implanted with the miniscope, as assayed in 

preliminary experiments. Blinding was performed during data c ollection and analysis. 

Calcium imaging surgeries 

For all surgeries, mice were anesthetized with 1.5 –2.0% isoflurane and placed into a 

stereotactic frame (David Kopf Instruments). Lidocaine (2%, Akorn) was applied to the 

sterilized incision site as an analgesic, and subcutaneous saline injections were 

adm inistered throughout each surgical procedure to prevent dehydration. 

For calcium imaging experiments, all mice underwent two stereotaxic procedures during 

the same operative session . Mice were anesthetized and unilaterally injected with 500 nl of 

AAV1.Syn.jGCaMP7f.WPRE (2.2 x 10 13 GC/ml) virus at 1 nl per second in the dorsal CA1 ( -

2 mm anteroposterior relative to bregma, +2.0 mm mediolateral from bregma, and 1.6 mm 

ventral from the skull surface) using a Nanoject microinjector (Drummond Scientific). They 

then underwent a GRIN lens implantation surgery. A craniotomy 2 mm in diameter was 

performed above the viral injection site. The cortical tissue above the targeted implant site 

was carefully aspirated using 27 gauge and 30 -gauge blunt needles. Buffered ACSF was 

constantly applied throughout the aspiration to prevent desiccation of the tissue. The 

aspiration was ceased after partial removal of the corpus callosum and full termination of 

bleeding at which point a GRIN lens (1.8 mm diameter, 4.31 mm length, 0.25 pitch, 0.50 

numerical aperture; Edmund Optics) was stereotaxically lowered to the targeted implant 

site ( -1.3 mm dorsoventral from the skull surface relative to the most caudal point of the 

craniotomy). Cyanoacrylate glue and dental cement (Lang Ce) were used to seal and cover 

the exposed skull, and Kwik -Sil (MPI) covered the exposed GRIN lens. Carprofen (5 mg kg −1)

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and dexamethasone (0.2 mg kg −1) were administered during surgery and then daily for 7 

days after surgery. Amoxicillin (0.25 mg ml −1) was delivered for 7 days in the drinking water. 

Animals were anesthetized again 3 weeks later, and a miniature microscope locked onto an 

aluminum baseplate was placed on top of the GRIN lens. The baseplate and miniscope 

assembly were adjusted until blood vessels and labeled neurons could be imaged. The 

baseplate was cemented into place at this position and the miniscope was un locked and 

detached from the baseplate. A plastic cap was locked into the baseplate to prevent debris 

from settling on the GRIN lens surface. 

CRISPR injection was done using the exact same procedure. The right hemisphere was 

injected with a cocktail containing 500nl of GCaMP7f and 500nl of AAV1.hSYN1.SaCas9.HA 

(5.04 x 10 13 GC/ml; control virus) or AAV1.hSYN1SaCas9.HA.U6.sgRNA -Grin1 (4.85 x 10 13 

GC/ml; GluN1 CRISPR virus), both were diluted 1:1 with saline. The left hemisphere was 

injected with 500nl of AAV1.hSYN1.SaCas9.HA (control virus) or AAV1.hSYN1SaCas9.HA. 

U6.sgRNA -Grin1 (GluN1 CRISPR virus) accordingly, both were diluted 1:1 with saline. 

Custom imaging in water maze 

The UCLA wire -free miniaturized microscope (21 ) scope was coated with a polymer (Key 

Polymer , Tough -Seal tm 21) that insulates its printed circuit boards (PCBs). The compound 

was applied with an applicator gun ( DMA 50; Tough -Seal ) on the electrically exposed parts 

of the PCB. The polymer was viscous at first and then cured into a rubbery form for long -

term durability. 

3 Mylar spherical helium -filled balloons (18” in diameter) were used to reduce the weight 

load on the animal’s head to avoid sinking. The balloons were attached to the wire -free 

scope using cords through a custom metal holder attached to the body of the sc ope. 

During each day of imaging, the miniscope was kept on the head of the animal for all of the 

day’s imaging sessions. This was done to avoid movements in the imaged field of view. The 

miniscope was removed at the end of each day. 

Morris water maze 

Imaging in the Morris water maze (MWM) was performed in a circular maze (120 cm in 

diameter; Maze Engineers) filled with water mixed with nontoxic white paint (Acrylic white 

paint – Blick). The distal cue navigation maze had a submerged platform (10 cm in 

diameter) located in one quadrant. The maze had 8 fixed starting points that were chosen 

randomly on each trial. Animals ~13 weeks old were imaged in the maze every other day 

for a total of 6 imaging sessions. We utilized a well -established behavioral pro tocol of 4 

consecutive trials run in 3 blocks to reach a total of 12 trials daily for increased imaging 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

time ( 4) . Each day included 3 blocks separated by 90 minutes of 4 back -to -back trials. In 

each trial, the animal was given 60 seconds to locate the platform. If the mouse failed to 

find the platform, the trial was terminated at 60 seconds and mice were removed fro m the 

water and placed on the platform. Animals were placed on the platform before and 

between each trial for 10 seconds. Animals were on the start location with their back facing 

the maze. Distal cues were placed at 3 locations: at East, North and West, w hen the center 

of the maze is considered as the reference 0 coordinate. West – black triangle sticker on a 

white wall (height – 10”; sides -12”) located  18 ” from the maze. North – black rectangle 

sticker on a white wall (height - 7”; side -12.5”) located 14” from the maze. East - a black 

cabinet pole on a white wall background (height – 42”; side -1.5”) located 14” from the 

maze. South – open to the experimenter. 

Animals were given two probe trials at end of the training trials on Day 3 and Day 6. The 

probe was done 1 hour after the last block of each day. During the probe trials the platform 

was removed and animals were allowed to search freely for 60 seconds. 

After the probe of Day 6, two more blocks of 12 back -to -back trials were added to increase 

the recording time of the last day. Blocks were separated 90 minutes apart to allow the 

animals to rest. In trained animals, each trial was relatively short as animals learned to find 

it at maximal performance. In the CRISPR -GluN1 deletion group, 2 out of 9 animals that 

exhibited thigmotaxis on Day 1 or on Day 6 (i.e. swimming in circles while touching the 

walls) and were excluded from further analysis. We excluded th ese animals because they 

had insufficient coverage of the maze to allow for proper analysis of spatial 

representations. 

Visible platform tests were done after the experiment. The platform was moved to a new 

quadrant and a flag was attached, extending 15 cm above the water. Animals were given 

the same regimen of trials as the hidden platform test for 2 days with 3 blocks in each day 

consisting of 4 trials back -to -back .

Behavioral tracking 

We built a stereo camera system to record behavior in the maze from diagonal angles, 

using monochrome CMOS cameras (Chameleon 3, Flir) with magnifying lenses 

(Computar). Cameras were positioned above the maze at an angle of 45 degrees from it. 

One camera w as in the southwest corner of the maze at a distance of 14” ; the other was at 

the east corner at 14” distance as well. 

An Arduino -generated 20 Hz TTL signal synchronized the cameras and allowed us to record 

at the same frame rate as the wire -free miniscope. We used SpinView 1.13.0.33 software 

for controlling the cameras and saving the videos (.AVI). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We processed these videos with custom -written code in MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA) 

that identified the dark pixels representing the mouse on the background of the white water 

maze to obtain the x, y coordinates of the mouse from each camera view. We then 

combined two camera views to obtain the 3D positions. We first calibrated the alignment 

using a 4 × 6 checkerboard with 4.5 × 4.5 mm square sizes. We then used a Rotation matrix 

(Euler quaternions) to make the 3D positions flat on the z -axis, as the 3D co ordinates 

calculated by the calibration algorithm are perpendicular to the diagonal axis of the 

cameras. Thus, we created the trajectory of the animal as if it was recorded from above. We 

normalized the x - and y -axes to reach the exact 60 cm radius of the maze. 

Calcium imaging analysis 

Wire -free miniscope data was extracted from microSD cards and saved as uncompressed 

8-bit AVI files for processing and analysis. For each day, we aligned and concatenated the 

movies in the MWM training blocks into one video file. NoRMCorre algorithm with non -rigid 

registrati on was used to correct for frame -to -frame translational shifts of the brain during 

animal movement (52 ). Constrained non -negative matrix factorization for endoscopic 

recordings (CNMF -E) was used to identify and extract the spatial shapes and fluorescent 

calcium activity of individual neurons (53 ). Fast online deconvolution for calcium imaging 

(OASIS toolbox) was used to deconvolve the fluorescent activity extracted from each 

neuron with an AR1 constrained model (54 ). The resulting measure can be interpreted as 

the probability of a neuron being active at each frame, scaled by an unknown constant. We 

thus referred to this measure in arbitrary units. Raw calcium traces were used for neural 

network decoding. 

Tracking the same cells across days 

To track the same neurons across multiple days of calcium imaging, we applied the 

CellReg (27 ) package ( https://github.com/zivlab/CellReg ). The spatial footprints of neurons 

from each day of recording were entered as inputs to CellReg GUI, which then computed a 

probabilistic model that the spatial footprints were from the same cell across days using 

spatial correlations and centroid distanc es of the spatial footprints. For each animal, a 

probability distribution of the nearest neighbors suspected to be same cells across days 

was plotted according to the centroid distance and spatial correlation grade. Similarly, 

another distribution of secon d nearest neighbor cells that are not suspected to be the 

same cells was plotted using these two measures. The cutoff of the maximal centroid 

distance and lowest spatial correlation grade to consider it the same cell was always put at 

the intersection of t hese two distributions to reduce false positive cells. These numbers 

varied between animals. No animals with considerable overlap between the two 

distributions were used. The mapping of all registered cells to their indices in each day was 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

obtained from CellReg in a matrix of size N (registered cells) x M (imaging days). This matrix 

was used to track the activity of the same cells across different recording days. 

Molecular cloning for CRISPR/Cas9 

To generate pAAV -hSyn1 -NLS -SaCas9 -HA, a pAAV -gfaABC1D -NLS -SaCas9 -HA plasmid 

was obtained from Addgene (ID #178960; (39 )) and the gfaABC1D promotor was replaced 

by the hSyn1 promotor amplified from pAAV -hSyn1 -mCherry (Addgene #114472). The 

resulting plasmid hSyn1 -NLS -SaCas9 -HA was used as a control. To knockdown the Grin1 

gene, U6 -sgGrin1 were amplified from pAAV -FLEX -SaCas9 -U6 -sgGrin1 (Addgene #124852; 

(40 )) and inserted into pAAV -hSyn1 -NLS -SaCas9 -HA to generate pAAV -hSyn1 -NLS -SaCas9 -

HA -U6 -sgGrin1. Both plasmids, hSyn1 -NLS -SaCas9 -HA and hSyn1 -NLS -SaCas9 -HA -U6 -

sgRNA -Grin1 have been deposited at Addgene (Addgene #239970 and #239971 

respectively). Molecular cloning was performed using In -Fusion cloning kits (Takara Bio). 

The fully sequenced plasmids wer e sent to Vigene Biosciences to generate AAV1 serotypes 

for each construct yielding a concentration >1.0 x 10 13 genome copies/ml (gc/mL). The 

cloning and sequencing strategies were designed with the SnapGene software (v7.0.3, 

Insightful Science). 

Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) 

Mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and transcardially perfused with phosphate -

buffered saline (PBS), followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains were quickly 

removed and fixed in 4% PFA for 24 hours at 4 oC before paraffin embedding. The formalin -

fixed paraffin -embedded samples were cut into 5 μm sections for staining. In situ 

hybridization was performed with the RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Reagent Kit v2 (ACD 

#323100) . Probes against Grin1 mRNA (ACD # 431611 ) were applied according to the 

manufacturer's protocol with the following modifications: epitope retrieval was performed 

for 10 minutes and Protease Plus treatment was performed for 5 minutes , and the TSA Vivid 

fluorophore 650 (ACD #323273) was applied at 1:3000 . IHC was performed following the 

completion of the RNAscope signal amplification steps, as previously described (55 ).

Sections were incubated at room temperature in primary antibodies (anti -GFP 1:1000 

Abcam # ab183734, RRID:AB_2732027 ; anti -HA 1:500 Novus Cat# NB600 -362, 

RRID:AB_10124937 ) for 2 hours followed by secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific 

# A -21206, RRID:AB_2535792 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific Cat# A -21432, RRID:AB_2535853 )

for 1 hour. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. The sections were mounted with Prolong 

Gold and allowed to dry overnight prior to imaging. 

Confocal imaging 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fluorescent imaging was performed on a Zeiss LSM 800 confocal microscope equipped 

with an inverted Axio Observer.Z1 stand and a Plan -Apochromat 10x/0.45 air objective 

(image to show extent of HA signal) and a 40x/1.4 oil immersion objective (image for 

quan tification). Fluorophores included DAPI (excitation 353 nm, emission 465 nm), Alexa 

Fluor 488 (493/517 nm), Cy3 (548/561 nm), and Alexa Fluor 647 (653/668 nm), with a 

pinhole set to 1 Airy unit for the longest wavelength. Detection was carried out using Ga AsP 

photomultiplier tube detectors. Images were acquired at a resolution of 512×512 pixels. 

Imaging and tile stitching were performed using Zeiss ZEN software. 

Quantification of IHC -ISH 

QuPath software (v0.5.1) was used for quantification (56 ). Cell segmentation was based on 

the DAPI counterstain. For quantification of Grin1 mRNA puncta, the “subcellular spot 

detection” function was applied with an expected spot size of 1 μm 2 (range 0.5 -2 μm 2). 

GCaMP -positive cells were classified using a threshold based on the mean cellular anti -

GFP signal. HA -positive cells were classified using a threshold based on the sum of the 

nuclear anti -HA signal. 

Slice preparation for electrophysiology 

Hippocampal slices from the dorsal third of the hippocampus were obtained from 2 - to 3 -

month -old, male B6129SF1/J hybrid mice injected with AAV1 -hsyn1 -SaCas9 -sgRNA -Grin1 

and their AAV1 -hsyn1 -SaCas9 injected controls. Mice were deeply anesthetized with 

isoflurane and, following cervical dislocation, the brain was removed and placed in cold 

(~4°C), oxygenated (95% O 2/5% CO 2) ACSF containing 124 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 25 mM 

NaHCO 3, 1mM NaH 2PO 4, 2 mM CaCl 2, 1.2 mM MgSO 4, and 10 mM glucose (all obtained 

from Millipo re -Sigma). Both hippocampi were then dissected from the brain, and a manual 

tissue slicer was used to prepare 400 -μm -thick slices. The CA3 region was removed, and 

slices were transferred to interface -type chambers continuously perfused with ACSF (2 -3

ml/mi n) and allowed to recover (at 30°C) for at least 2 hours before recordings. 

Electrophysiological slice recordings : Extracellular recordings were done using slices 

maintained in interface -type recording chambers perfused (2 -3 ml/min) with ACSF. A 

bipolar, stimulating electrode fabricated from twisted strands of Formvar -insulated nickel -

chromium wire (A -M Systems) was placed in strat um radiatum to activate Schaffer 

collateral/commissural fiber synapses onto CA1 pyramidal cells (basal stimulation rate = 

0.02 Hz). Field EPSPs (fEPSPs) were recorded in stratum radiatum using low -resistance ( »10 

MW) glass microelectrodes filled with ACSF and a MultiClamp 700B amplifier (Molecular 

Devices). Signals were low -pass filtered with a cutoff frequency of 2 kHz and digitized at 10 

kHz. After determining the maximal amplitude of fEPSPs evoked by presynaptic fiber 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

stimulation, the stimulation intensity was adjusted to evoke fEPSPs with an amplitude 

~50% of the maximal amplitude. fEPSPs (evoked throughout an experiment at 0.02 Hz) 

were collected and analyzed using pClamp10 software (Molecular Devices). Conventional 

Hebbian LTP was induced using high -frequency synaptic stimulation (two, 1 -second -long 

trains of 100 Hz synaptic stimulation delivered with an inter -train interval = 20s). A 

complex -spike burst -dependent form of BTSP (42 ) was induced using theta -pulse 

stimulation (single pulses of presynaptic fiber stimulation delivered at 5 Hz, duration = 

15s). Two slices/protocol were recorded using slices obtained from the same animal and 

the results were averaged. Average slopes of fEPSPs (normalized to baseline) were 

recorded 55 -60 minutes after LTP induction were used for statistical comparisons. 

Statistical tests (Student’s t-tests with n = the number of animals/group) were performed 

using SigmaPlot 12.5 (Grafiti). 

Calcium imaging analysis: 

Spatial tuning analysis: 

The circular maze was discretized into spatial bins each measuring 4 × 4 cm. For each bin, 

neuronal firing activity was estimated as the sum of the deconvolved time -varying calcium 

event activities divided by the total time the animal occupied that bin while moving at 

speeds greater than 3 cm/s. Spatial bins with an occupancy duration of less than 0.025 s 

were excluded from further analysis. 

Reducing the bias when comparing neural tuning selectivity across days: 

To reduce the bias of spatial tuning selectivity between day 1 and day 6, the total duration 

of data used for spatial rate map construction was equalized across sessions. For each 

neuron, trials were randomly subsampled from both day 1 and day 6 such that the total 

amount of data was matched between sessions. This subsampling procedure was 

repeated 10 times. 

Measure of selectivity for the spatial rate map 

One commonly used metric for quantifying the degree of selectivity in a rate map is the 

sparsity ( 𝑆 P), which is defined as follows: 

𝑆𝑃 = 1 − 1

𝑁 

(∑ 𝑟 𝑛 )𝑁 

> 𝑛
> 2

∑ 𝑟 𝑛 

> 2𝑁
> 𝑛

where 𝑁 represents the total number of bins or conditions, such as spatial bins, and 𝑟 𝑛 

denotes the firing rate in the n-th bin. The sparsity is a dimensionless metric, providing 

insight into the selectivity of a neuron’s firing across various conditions, such as positions. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The sparsity ranges from 0 to 1, with a higher value indicating greater selectivity of firing in 

specific bins (29 ).

Normalization of spatial sparsity using shuffled controls: 

To further reduce the behavioral bias in the comparison of spatial tuning selectivity 

between day 1 and day 6, sparsity values were normalized relative to shuffled controls. 

Shuffled datasets were generated by circularly shifting the animal’s position trace by a 

random temporal offset, th ereby preserving the temporal structure of neural activity while 

disrupting its relationship to spatial position. This shuffling procedure was repeated 50 

times for each neuron. For each shuffle, spatial rate maps were reco mputed and sparsity 

was calculated, yielding a distribution of shuffled sparsity values. The 95 th percentile of 

this shuffled sparsity distribution was then subtracted from the original (unshuffled) 

sparsity value to obtain a normalized sparsity measure for each neuron. This normalization 

procedure was repeated 10 times, and normalized sparsity valu es were averaged across 

repetitions. 

𝑆 shuffle -subtracted sparsity = 𝑆 − 𝑝 (𝑆 shuffled , 95 )

Behavior -matched control analysis for spatial tuning selectivity: 

To control for potential differences in behavioral sampling between Day 1 and Day 6, we 

performed an additional behavior -matched control analysis. Specifically, spatial analyses 

were restricted to locations that were visited on both Day 1 and Day 6 for each animal. Only 

spatial bins that met this criterion were included in the construction of spatial rate maps, 

thereby ensuring that spatial tuning comparisons were based on almost -identical regions 

of the environment across sessions. 

In addition, to prevent bias arising from unequal sampling duration, the total amount of 

data used to compute spatial sparsity was equalized between Day 1 and Day 6. For each 

neuron, data from the overlapping spatial bins were randomly subsampled such that the 

total duration of included data was matched across the two days. Spatial sparsity was then 

computed using this behavior -matched and duration -matched datase t. This control 

analysis ensured that observed differences in spatial tuning selectivity were no t driven by 

differences in spatial coverage or behavioral sampling between sessions. 

Feedforward neural network –based decoding 

To decode the animal’s position, we implemented feedforward neural networks (FFNs). 

Neural and behavioral data were first preprocessed and temporally aligned prior to decoder 

training. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Data preprocessing and feature construction 

Calcium fluorescence signals ( ΔF/F) from each neuron were discretized into non -

overlapping 100 ms temporal bins, and the average fluorescence value within each bin was 

computed. Behavioral variable, i.e., position, was similarly discretized into 100 ms bin s and 

averaged within each bin to ensure temporal alignment with the neural data. 

To decode the behavioral variable at the  𝑖 -th time bin, we constructed neural feature 

vectors that incorporated temporal context by including  2𝑘 + 1consecutive bins of neural 

activity for each neuron:  𝑘 bins preceding the  𝑖 -th bin, the concurrent  𝑖 -th bin, and  𝑘 bins 

following it. Unless otherwise specified,  𝑘 = 10 , corresponding to a temporal window of 

2.1 s centered on the decoded time point. 

Feature matrices were generated by concatenating these temporally extended neural 

signals across all recorded neurons. Each feature matrix consisted of  𝑀 rows, 

corresponding to the number of time points used for training, and  𝑁 × (2𝑘 + 1)columns, 

where  𝑁 denotes the number of neurons. For each neuron, the calcium fluorescence 

values from the  2𝑘 + 1bins were extracted and concatenated, and this process was 

repeated across all neurons to form the full input vector for the FFN. 

FFN architectures for decoding behavioral variables 

The input layer consisted of  𝑁 × (2𝑘 + 1) nodes. For position decoding, we employed a 

feedforward neural network with two hidden layers, each containing the same number of 

nodes as the input layer. A dropout rate of 0.2 was applied during training, and the network 

was trained for 15 epochs. The ou tput layer comprised two nodes representing the 

decoded x - and y -coordinates of the animal’s position at the  𝑖 -th time bin. 

Decoding performance metrics 

To quantify decoding performance and assess improvements associated with learning in 

the Morris water maze task, we computed the mean positional decoding error as: 

𝐸 𝑠 = 1

𝐿 ∑ √(𝑥 𝑖 − 𝑥 ̂ 𝑖 )2 + (𝑦 𝑖 − 𝑦 ̂ 𝑖 )2

> 𝐿
> 𝑖 =1

,

where  𝑥 𝑖  and  𝑦 𝑖  denote the true x - and y -coordinates at the  𝑖 -th time bin,  𝑥 ̂ 𝑖  and 

𝑦 ̂ 𝑖 represent the corresponding decoded coordinates, and  𝐿  is the total number of decoded 

time bins. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

As an additional metric for evaluating position decoding performance, we computed the 

two -dimensional correlation between the true coordinate matrix  𝐴 = [𝑋 , 𝑌 ]and the 

decoded coordinate matrix  𝐵 = [𝑋 ̂ , 𝑌 ̂ ], defined as: 

𝑅 𝑠 =

∑ ∑ (𝐴 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) −

> 𝑛
> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑚
> 𝑖 =1

𝐴 ˉ)(𝐵 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) − 𝐵 ˉ )

√(∑ ∑ (

> 𝑛
> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑚
> 𝑖 =1

𝐴 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) − 𝐴 ˉ)2) (∑ ∑ (

> 𝑛
> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑚
> 𝑖 =1

𝐵 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) − 𝐵 ˉ )2)

,

where  𝑚  and  𝑛  denote the number of rows and columns of the coordinate matrices, 

respectively,  𝐴 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) and  𝐵 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) represent individual matrix elements, and  𝐴 ˉ and  𝐵 ˉ are the 

mean values of matrices  𝐴  and  𝐵 .

Reducing the bias when comparing decoding performance across days: 

To reduce bias in the comparison of decoding performance metrics between Day 1 and Day 

6, the total amount of data used for decoding was equalized across sessions. For each 

animal, trials were randomly selected from Day 1 and Day 6 such that the total duration of 

data was matched between the two days. Following data -length equalization, the dataset 

from each day was randomly partitioned into training and testing subsets, with 80% of the 

data used for training and the remaining 2 0% reserved for testing. This procedure ensured 

that differences in decoding performance between Day 1 and Day 6 were not driven by 

unequal data availability or trial selection. 

Normalization of decoding performance using shuffled controls: 

To further reduce the behavioral bias of decoding performance metrics between Day 1 and 

Day 6, we normalize decoding performance metrics, we generated shuffled control 

datasets by circularly shifting the calcium fluorescence trace of each neuron by a random 

temporal offset. This procedure preserved the temporal structure of neural activity while 

disrup ting its alignment with behavioral variables. The shuffled neural signals were then 

used as inputs to the same feedforward neural network architectures, and decoding 

performance metrics —including positional decoding error and two -dimensional 

correlation co efficient —were computed for each shuffle. 

This shuffling procedure was repeated 50 times, yielding a distribution of decoding 

performance metrics. The 95th percentile of the shuffled distribution was then subtracted 

from the corresponding original (unshuffled) decoding metric to obtain a normalize d

measure of decoding performance. To further reduce variability due to random 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

subsampling, the entire shuffling and normalization procedure was repeated 10 times, and 

normalized decoding performance metrics were averaged across repetitions. 

𝐸 shuffle -subtracted decoding error = 𝐸 − 𝑝 (𝐸 shuffled , 95 )

Behavior -matched control analysis for decoding performance: 

To control for potential effects of behavioral differences between Day 1 and Day 6 on 

decoding performance, we performed an additional behavior -matched control analysis 

analogous to that used for spatial sparsity. Specifically, decoding analyses were restricted 

to spatial positions that were visited on both Day 1 and Day 6 for each animal. Only time 

bins corresponding to these overlapping positions were included, thereby ensuring that 

decoding performance was evaluated on almost -identical behavioral states across 

session s. 

In addition, to eliminate bias arising from unequal sampling duration, the total amount of 

data used for decoding was equalized between Day 1 and Day 6. For each session, time 

bins were randomly subsampled from the overlapping spatial positions such that the total 

data duration was matched across days. 

Shuffled normalization of behavior -matched decoding performance: 

Following behavior - and duration -matching, decoding performance was normalized using 

shuffled controls. Shuffled datasets were generated by circularly shifting the calcium 

fluorescence trace of each neuron by a random temporal offset. This shuffling proced ure 

was repeated 50 times, yielding a distribution of decoding performance metrics. The 95th 

percentile of this shuffled distribution was then subtracted from the original (unshuffled) 

decoding metric to obtain a normalized measure of decoding performance. 

Statistical analysis 

All statistical analysis was conducted using Prism (GraphPad) or MATLAB (MathWorks). 

Statistical tests used in this study include paired t-tests for two samples (as appropriate). 

For probe analysis with four samples, we used planned paired t-tests with Bonferroni 

correction (* P < 0.0167 ). Two -way ANOVA with repeated measures was used for statistical 

analysis of all other samples. The Kolmogorov -Smirnov test was applied to cumulative 

distributions. The significance threshold was held at α = 0.05; Not significant, P> 0.05; *P <

0.05; **P < 0.01; ** *P < 0.001. Sample sizes were not predetermined using statistical 

methods. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 

1. J. O’Keefe, J. Dostrovsky, The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary evidence from 

unit activity in the freely -moving rat. Brain Res. , doi: 10.1016/0006 -8993(71)90358 -1

(1971). 

2. R. G. M. Morris, J. O’Keefe, Place navigation impaired in rats with hippocampal lesions. 

Nature 297 , 681 –683 (1982) 

3. Y. H. Cho, E. Friedman, A. J. Silva, Ibotenate lesions of the hippocampus impair spatial 

learning but not contextual fear conditioning in mice. Behavioural Brain Research 98 , 77 –

87 (1998). 

4. S. A. Hollup, S. Molden, J. G. Donnett, M. B. Moser, E. I. Moser, Accumulation of 

hippocampal place fields at the goal location in an annular watermaze task. Journal of 

Neuroscience 21 , 1635 –1644 (2001). 

5. D. Dupret, J. O’Neill, B. Pleydell -Bouverie, J. Csicsvari, The reorganization and reactivation 

of hippocampal maps predict spatial memory performance. Nat. Neurosci. 13 , 995 –1002 

(2010). 

6. J. D. Zaremba, A. Diamantopoulou, N. B. Danielson, A. D. Grosmark, P. W. Kaifosh, J. C. 

Bowler, Z. Liao, F. T. Sparks, J. A. Gogos, A. Losonczy, Impaired hippocampal place cell 

dynamics in a mouse model of the 22q11.2 deletion. Nat. Neurosci. 20 , 1612 –1623 

(2017). 

7. M. Sosa, M. H. Plitt, L. M. Giocomo, A Flexible Hippocampal Population Code for 

Experience Relative to Reward (Springer US, 2025; http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -

025 -01985 -4)vol. 28. 

8. M. Yaghoubi, A. Nieto -Posadas, C. -A. Mosser, T. Gisiger, É. Wilson, S. Williams, M. P. 

Brandon, Predictive Coding of Reward in the Hippocampus. bioRxiv , 2024.09.03.611040 

(2024). 

9. N. T. M. Robinson, L. A. L. Descamps, L. E. Russell, M. O. Buchholz, B. A. Bicknell, G. K. 

Antonov, J. Y. N. Lau, R. Nutbrown, C. Schmidt -Hieber, M. Häusser, Targeted Activation of 

Hippocampal Place Cells Drives Memory -Guided Spatial Behavior. Cell 183 , 1586 -

1599.e10 (2020). 

10. M. P. Karlsson, L. M. Frank, Network dynamics underlying the formation of sparse, 

informative representations in the hippocampus. Journal of Neuroscience 28 , 14271 –

14281 (2008). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11. D. Khatib, A. Ratzon, M. Sellevoll, O. Barak, G. Morris, D. Derdikman, Active experience, 

not time, determines within -day representational drift in dorsal CA1. Neuron 111 , 2348 -

2356.e5 (2023). 

12. L. Sheintuch, N. Geva, D. Deitch, A. Rubin, Y. Ziv, Organization of hippocampal CA3 into 

correlated cell assemblies supports a stable spatial code. Cell Rep. 42 , 112119 (2023). 

13. F. Cacucci, T. J. Wills, C. Lever, K. P. Giese, J. O’Keefe, Experience -dependent increase in 

CA1 place cell spatial information, but not spatial reproducibility, is dependent on the 

autophosphorylation of the α-isoform of the calcium/calmodulin -dependent protein 

kinase II. Journal of Neuroscience 27 , 7854 –7859 (2007). 

14. M. R. Mehta, From synaptic plasticity to spatial maps and sequence learning. 

Hippocampus 25 , 756 –762 (2015). 

15. R. G. M. Morris, Long -term potentiation and memory. Philosophical Transactions of the 

Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 358 , 643 –647 (2003). 

16. T. J. McHugh, K. I. Blum, J. Z. Tsien, S. Tonegawa, M. A. Wilson, Impaired hippocampal 

representation of space in CA1 -specific NMDAR1 knockout mice. Cell 87 , 1339 –1349 

(1996). 

17. M. R. Mehta, M. C. Quirk, M. A. Wilson, Experience -dependent asymmetric shape of 

hippocampal receptive fields. Neuron 25 , 707 –715 (2000). 

18. M. R. Mehta, C. A. Barnes, B. L. Mcnaughton , Experience -dependent, asymmetric 

expansion of hippocampal place fields. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94 , 8918 –8921 

(1997). 

19. J. J. Moore, J. D. Cushman, L. Acharya, B. Popeney, M. R. Mehta, Linking hippocampal 

multiplexed tuning, Hebbian plasticity and navigation. Nature 599 , 442 –448 (2021). 

20. Z. M. Aghajan, L. Acharya, J. J. Moore, J. D. Cushman, C. Vuong, M. R. Mehta, Impaired 

spatial selectivity and intact phase precession in two -dimensional virtual reality. Nat. 

Neurosci. , doi: 10.1038/nn.3884 (2015). 

21. A. T. Shuman, D. Aharoni, D. J. Cai, C. R. Lee, S. Chavlis, J. Taxidis, S. E. Flores, K. Cheng, M. 

Javaherian, C. C. Kaba, M. Shtrahman, K. I. Bakhurin, S. Masmanidis, Title : Breakdown of 

spatial coding and neural synchronization in epilepsy Affiliations : Department of 

Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute , Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai , 

New York , NY Department of Neurology , David Geffen School of Me. 1 –44 (2018). 

22. H. Dana, Y. Sun, B. Mohar, B. K. Hulse, A. M. Kerlin, J. P. Hasseman, G. Tsegaye, A. Tsang, 

A. Wong, R. Patel, J. J. Macklin, Y. Chen, A. Konnerth, V. Jayaraman, L. L. Looger, E. R. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Schreiter, K. Svoboda, D. S. Kim, High -performance calcium sensors for imaging activity in 

neuronal populations and microcompartments. Nat. Methods 16 , 649 –657 (2019). 

23. R. Morris, Developments of a water -maze procedure for studying spatial learning in the 

rat. J. Neurosci. Methods 11 , 47 –60 (1984). 

24. C. V. Vorhees, M. T. Williams, Morris water maze: Procedures for assessing spatial and 

related forms of learning and memory. Nat. Protoc. 1, 848 –858 (2006). 

25. A. J. Silva, R. Paylor, J. M. Wehner, S. Tonegawa, Impaired spatial learning in α-calcium -

calmodulin kinase II mutant mice. Science (1979). 257 , 206 –211 (1992). 

26. Y. Ziv, L. D. Burns, E. D. Cocker, E. O. Hamel, K. K. Ghosh, L. J. Kitch, A. El Gamal, M. J. 

Schnitzer, Long -term dynamics of CA1 hippocampal place codes. Nat. Neurosci. 16 , 264 –

266 (2013). 

27. L. Sheintuch, A. Rubin, N. Brande -Eilat, N. Geva, N. Sadeh, O. Pinchasof, Y. Ziv, Tracking 

the Same Neurons across Multiple Days in Ca2+ Imaging Data. Cell Rep. , doi: 

10.1016/j.celrep.2017.10.013 (2017). 

28. P. Ravassard, A. Kees, B. Willers, D. Ho, D. Aharoni, J. Cushman, Z. M. Aghajan, M. R. 

Mehta, S. Text, F. References, Supplementary Materials for Multisensory control of 

hippocampal spatiotemporal selectivity. Science , 1342 –1347 (2013). 

29. L. Acharya, Z. M. Aghajan, C. Vuong, J. J. Moore, M. R. Mehta, Causal Influence of Visual 

Cues on Hippocampal Directional Selectivity. Cell 164 , 197 –207 (2016). 

30. A. Treves, E. T. Rolls, What determines the capacity of autoassociative memories in the 

brain? Network: Computation in Neural Systems 2, 371 –397 (1991). 

31. B. L. Mcnaughton, C. A. Barnes, J. L. Gerrard, K. Gothard, M. W. Jung, J. J. Knierim, H. 

Kudrimoti, Y. Qin, W. E. Skaggs, M. Suster, K. L. Weaver, Deciphering the hippocampal 

polyglot: The hippocampus as a path integration system. Journal of Experimental Biology 

199 , 173 –185 (1996). 

32. S. Panzeri, A. Treves, Analytical estimates of limited sampling biases in different 

information measures. Network: Computation in Neural Systems 7, 87 –107 (1996). 

33. B. L. McNaughton, C. A. Barnes, J. O’Keefe, The contributions of position, direction, and 

velocity to single unit activity in the hippocampus of freely -moving rats. Exp. Brain Res. 

52 , 41 –49 (1983). 

34. J. I. Glaser, A. S. Benjamin, R. H. Chowdhury, M. G. Perich, L. E. Miller, K. P. Kording, 

Machine learning for neural decoding. eNeuro 7, 1 –16 (2020). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35. R. G. M. Morris, E. Anderson, G. S. Lynch, M. Baudry, Selective impairment of learning 

and blockade of long -term potentiation by an N -methyl -D-aspartate receptor antagonist, 

AP5. Nature , doi: 10.1038/319774a0 (1986). 

36. J. Z. Tsien, P. T. Huerta, S. Tonegawa, The essential role of hippocampal CA1 NMDA 

receptor -dependent synaptic plasticity in spatial memory. Cell 87 , 1327 –1338 (1996). 

37. J. Z. Tsien, D. F. Chen, D. Gerber, C. Tom, E. H. Mercer, D. J. Anderson, M. Mayford, E. R. 

Kandel, S. Tonegawa, Subregion - and cell type -restricted gene knockout in mouse brain. 

Cell 87 , 1317 –1326 (1996). 

38. S. Incontro, C. S. Asensio, R. H. Edwards, R. A. Nicoll, Efficient, Complete Deletion of 

Synaptic Proteins using CRISPR. Neuron 83 , 1051 –1057 (2014). 

39. F. Endo, A. Kasai, J. S. Soto, X. Yu, Z. Qu, H. Hashimoto, V. Gradinaru, R. Kawaguchi, B. S. 

Khakh, Molecular basis of astrocyte diversity and morphology across the CNS in health 

and disease. Science (1979). 378 (2022). 

40. A. C. Hunker, M. E. Soden, D. Krayushkina, G. Heymann, R. Awatramani, L. S. Zweifel, 

Conditional Single Vector CRISPR/SaCas9 Viruses for Efficient Mutagenesis in the Adult 

Mouse Nervous System. Cell Rep. 30 , 4303 -4316.e6 (2020). 

41. K. C. Bittner, A. D. Milstein, C. Grienberger, S. Romani, J. C. Magee, Behavioral time scale 

synaptic plasticity underlies CA1 place fields. Science (1979). 357 , 1033 –1036 (2017). 

42. T. J. O’Dell, Behavioral Timescale Cooperativity and Competitive Synaptic Interactions 

Regulate the Induction of Complex Spike Burst -Dependent Long -Term Potentiation. 

Journal of Neuroscience 42 , 2647 –2661 (2022). 

43. R. G. M. Morris, Spatial localization does not require the presence of local cues. Learn. 

Motiv. 12 , 239 –260 (1981). 

44. S. A. Deadwyler, The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. John O’Keefe , Lynn Nadel 

(1980)vol. 55. 

45. K. Nakazawa, T. J. McHugh, M. A. Wilson, S. Tonegawa, NMDA receptors, place cells and 

hippocampal spatial memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 5, 361 –372 (2004). 

46. D. M. Bannerman, R. Sprengel, D. J. Sanderson, S. B. Mchugh, J. N. P. Rawlins, H. Monyer, 

P. H. Seeburg, Hippocampal synaptic plasticity, spatial memory and anxiety. Nat. Rev. 

Neurosci. 15 , 181 –192 (2014). 

47. N. Rebola, M. Carta, C. Mulle, Operation and plasticity of hippocampal CA3 circuits: 

Implications for memory encoding. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 18 , 209 –221 (2017). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

48. D. Aronov, D. W. Tank, Engagement of Neural Circuits Underlying 2D Spatial Navigation in 

a Rodent Virtual Reality System. Neuron 84 , 442 –456 (2014). 

49. J. Ormond, J. O’Keefe, Hippocampal place cells have goal -oriented vector fields during 

navigation. Nature 607 , 741 –746 (2022). 

50. A. Sarel, A. Finkelstein, L. Las, N. Ulanovsky, Vectorial representation of spatial goals in 

the hippocampus of bats. Science (1979). 355 , 176 –180 (2017). 

51. N. C. John, A. Collins, J. C. Crabbe, W. Frankel, N. Henderson, R. J. Hitzemann, S. C. 

Maxson, L. L. Miner, A. J. Silva, J. M. Wehner, A. W. R. Paylor, J. N. Crawley, J. K. Belknap, 

A. Wynshaw -Boris, R. Paylor, Behavioral phenotypes of inbred mouse strain s: implications 

and recommendations for molecular studies. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 132 , 107 –24 

(1997). 

52. E. A. Pnevmatikakis, A. Giovannucci, NoRMCorre: An online algorithm for piecewise rigid 

motion correction of calcium imaging data. J. Neurosci. Methods 291 , 83 –94 (2017). 

53. P. Zhou, S. L. Resendez, J. Rodriguez -Romaguera, J. C. Jimenez, S. Q. Neufeld, A. 

Giovannucci, J. Friedrich, E. A. Pnevmatikakis, G. D. Stuber, R. Hen, M. A. Kheirbek, B. L. 

Sabatini, R. E. Kass, L. Paninski, Efficient and accurate extraction of in vivo c alcium signals 

from microendoscopic video data. Elife , doi: 10.7554/eLife.28728 (2018). 

54. L. Friedrich, Johannes. Zhou, Pengcheng . Paninski, Fast online deconvolution of calcium 

imaging data. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13 (2017). 

55. O. R. Nilsson, L. Kari, R. Rosenke, O. Steele -Mortimer, Protocol for RNA fluorescence in 

situ hybridization in mouse meningeal whole mounts. STAR Protoc. 3, 101256 (2022). 

56. P. Bankhead, M. B. Loughrey, J. A. Fernández, Y. Dombrowski, D. G. McArt, P. D. Dunne, S. 

McQuaid, R. T. Gray, L. J. Murray, H. G. Coleman, J. A. James, M. Salto -Tellez, P. W. 

Hamilton, QuPath: Open source software for digital pathology image analysis. Sci. Rep. 7

(2017). 

Acknowledgements 

We thank A. Arac, T.J. O’Dell, M. Ollivier and L. Sheintuch for feedback on the manuscript. 

We also thank J. Liu for technical support. This work was supported by the following 

funding sources: 4R01AG03622 , P50HD103557 , R01MH132736 and the NSF Mentor award 

for M.S. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Ethics declaration 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

Data availability 

Data and analysis code will be made available in supplementary information and on 

GitHub after manuscript acceptance. Any additional information to analyze the data 

reported in this paper is available from the corresponding authors. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 15, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.07.13.734058 doi: bioRxiv preprint